 started. Here we go. Okay. So welcome everybody. I this most of you know a bomb Naviola through this group. I had never heard a bomb Naviola tell you, it was in this group that compensated steep gorgeous in Sue Carter. And so a bomb has been remarkable as far as putting the sides behind clinical concepts a lot of us have known for a long time. So I think was been so excited for this group is that we've been strictly known what received it were clinically but we didn't really know why. Then Bob and then different people who could have gone very very deep with Bob be one of the core people who really moved this process along. So I'll look Bob in a new sense. So I'm David Hanskum. I'm a sort of retired. I've been on a better, I quit my practice in 2019, this because I realized that medicine so just came from the science. And it's fine to really particularly were actually actively hurting people not understanding physiology quantities. So I'm going to see porous in 2020 and Stu Carter and this group is already volatile to that. So it's certainly evolved out of nowhere, which not really a plan and process. So tonight I asked Bob and Naviola talk to us. It's 102 yet again and I just didn't understand so the basic study covered three or four times. So we're going to start a we'll do a little bit of a rewind and just explain some of the things that Bob is does for us all dangerous sponsor of the modern country in the cell and how the trans how chronicles these are so different than a cuter's ease. And I'm going to basically be the moderator and ask Bob a bunch of hopefully not too many questions Bob. But bear with me. Okay. That's what today's all about. There's many questions as you want and we'll just take it where it goes. Okay. All right Bob, we want to do a shoot yourself and we'll start it here. Sure. Okay. So I'm Bob Naviola professor of medicine, pediatricics and and a pathology at the University of California San Diego. I've been here for about 30 years. And we study mitochondria from conception to old age. And that's the only thing that we study in the lab. So I guess so David asked me to start off with a little summary of mitochondria. And one way to start would be to say, I don't really want to overstate the importance of mitochondria. There only is important as for example the battery and motor of a Tesla car would be and cells without mitochondria would function about as well as a Tesla car without those two things. So it's important to think about you know mitochondria, though in a broader concept, there are true biological concepts, which is, you know, for a long time, it was relegated to the powerhouse of the cell. But you know, the last 20 years of of science have really showed us that that that metaphor, description has, you know, really, you know, how should I say, you know, it's not sufficient to describe what mitochondria do for the cell. So so in addition to energy mitochondria act as the coordinating center for all metabolism in the cell. And you know, and so if you imagine cells as receiving hundreds of streams of information in the form of chemical chemicals and metabolites, those are processed by mitochondria. And, you know, work products are produced that allow cells to do to grow and and repair themselves and to communicate with other cells. So anyway, so mitochondria are much more than powerhouses. They are actually coordinating centers for metabolism in the cell. And they are the first line of defense when a threat is, well, when a threat occurs. So one, one thing that's that I wanted to start with is maybe, you know, this description of the two problems of chronic illness that, that, you know, I see her two perspectives. And one is just, you know, I'll call the bottom up perspective and the other is the top down perspective. And I think, you know, maybe if I were to share a slide, we could, you know, talk a little bit about this. So in this slide, we have as a goal symptom relief and their bottom up therapies.