 started. Here we go. Okay. So welcome everybody. This most of you know, a bottom-navio through this group. I had never heard of bottom-navio till I was in this group, compliments the steepboard distance through Carter. And so Bob has been remarkable as far as putting in science behind clinical concepts. A lot of us have known for a long time. So I think it was finished up right for this group is that we've been secretly known what received it work clinically, but we don't really know why. Then Bob and then different people have been going very, very deep with Bob being one of the core people. We really move this process along. So I'll let Bob introduce himself. David Hanscomb, I'm a sort of retired. I've been on, been on, I quit my practice in 2019, just because I realized that medicine so just came from the science. In his spine surgery, particularly, we're actually actively hurting people not understanding the physiology of chronic disease. So I was see Portus in 2020 and Stucarter and this group is already evolved out of that. So it certainly evolved out of nowhere, which not really a planned process. So tonight I asked Bob and Navio to talk to him. He's talking to him yet again, and I just didn't understand some of the basics that he covered three or four times. So we're going to start out, we do a little bit of rewind and just explain some of things that Bob is does for us all danger response. We're on the congenital cell and how the trends, how chronic disease is so different than acute disease. And I'm going to basically be the moderator and ask Bob a bunch of hopefully not too naive questions, Bob, but bear with me. Okay. That's what today's all about. As many questions as you want. And you know, we'll just take it, you know, where it goes. Okay. All right. Bob, we want to introduce yourself and we'll get started here. Sure. Okay. So I'm Bob Navio, professor of medicine, pediatrics and and pathology at the University of California San Diego. I've been here for about 30 years. And you know, we study mitochondria, you know, from conception to old age. And that's the only thing that we study in the lab. So, so I guess, you know, so David asked me to start off with a little summary of mitochondria. And one way to start would be to say, I don't really want to, you know, overstate the importance of mitochondria. There only as important as, for example, the battery and motor of a Tesla car would be and cells without mitochondria would function about as well as, you know, as a Tesla car without those two things. So, so it's important to think about, you know, mitochondria, though in a broader concept in their true biological concept, which is, if for a long time, it was relegated to the powerhouse of the cell. But the last 20 years of science had really showed us that that metaphor description has, you know, really, you know, how should I say, you know, it's not sufficient to describe what mitochondria do for the cell. So, so in addition to energy, mitochondria act as a coordinating center for all metabolism in the cell. And, you know, and so if you imagine cells as receiving hundreds of streams of information in the form of chemicals and metabolites, those are processed by mitochondria. And, you know, work products are produced that allow cells to do to grow and repair themselves and to communicate and to communicate with other cells. So, anyway, so mitochondria are much more than powerhouses. They, they are actually coordinating centers for metabolism in the cell. And they are the first line of defense when a threat is, well, when a threat occurs. So, one thing that's that I wanted to start with is maybe, you know, this description of the two problems of chronic illness that, you know, I see or two perspectives. And one is just, you know, I'll call the bottom up perspective. And the other is the top down perspective. And I think, you know, maybe if I were to share a slide, we could, you know, talk a little bit about this. So, in this slide, we have as a goal symptom relief. And there are bottom up therapies that will address, you know, one problem, which is, you know, the persistence of cell danger signals and high-percent activity to ATP signaling. And also the dampen receptivity to system safety signals. And then their top, excuse me, where'd that go? Yeah, so, and then there are top down therapies that also address symptom release. And now one of the difficulties that many clinicians run into is that they know every master clinician knows that every patient is unique. They're unique biochemically, they're unique genetically. And so, on the right, I have personalized therapies where patients are not aggregated because of the individual differences in clinical heterogeneity. And then the way that information, the results of treatments are reported is in case reports in clinical experience. But there are also generalized therapies that really that address, you know, shared signs and symptoms of patients who are aggregated into groups. And that, you know, classical randomized clinical trials can actually help you despite, you know, individual differences. And one of the things that, you know, we noticed early on in doing our metabolomics work and actually has multi-omics as expanded so, you know, so that proteins and gene expression changes are evaluated as well. There are literally hundreds of unique metabolic molecular changes that occur in each person who has a chronic illness. And in our studies, a metabolism about 75% of the differences in metabolism were unique to the individual. Okay. And actually reflected their unique and, you know, unique path to, you know, their current signs and symptoms. But 25% were shared by all the individuals with that, you know, particular chronic disorder, whether it's autism, PTSD, major impressive disorder, goal for illness, you know, all the other disorders that we've looked at. This proportion is about the same. So the generalized therapies are really directed at those, you know, shared abnormalities. And the personalized therapies are directed at the things that are unique to the individual. Okay. So I'll leave it at that. And, yeah. And David, if you have a comment, I can, I can talk about it. I mean, here's a, here's a way of looking at the bottom up perspective of threat physiology, where, you know, as a stress, as cells are exposed to, and systems are exposed to greater and greater stress, you move from housekeeping function to an increase, you know, a physiologic stress that occurs with the release of extracellular ATP through gated channels in the cell membrane. And there can be acute danger that adds reactive oxygen to that mild exercise will also produce this this, you know, three things, you know, more than three, but ATP reactive oxygen and xanthine. And intense exercise adds, neuropanephrine and epinephrine and luchotrine. And then, when DNA synthesis is blocked, there's another metabolite called deoxyadenocene that gets released that, you know, is also, you know, a mediator of innate immunity even in worms. I mean, so, some of these, so, in C elegance, you know, so, so it's, so, so these things are ancient ways of ways of cells responding to stress. And I would argue, so on the one hand, you know, I know that the terms of danger, anxiety, fear, panic, etc, are affective terms that really people have definitions for at the behavioral level. But, you know, I would argue that when those things are experienced at the behavioral level, they are always associated with these cellular changes as well. Now, there are many variations. Once you start going beyond this, there are different growth factors