 started. Here we go. Okay. So welcome everybody. I this most of you know a bomb Naviola through this group. I had never heard a bomb Naviola tell you, it was in this group that compensated steep gorgeous in Sue Carter. And so a bomb has been remarkable as far as putting the sides behind clinical concepts a lot of us have known for a long time. So I think was been so excited for this group is that we've been strictly known what received it were clinically but we didn't really know why. Then Bob and then different people who could have gone very very deep with Bob be one of the core people who really moved this process along. So I'll look Bob in a new sense. So I'm David Hanskum. I'm a sort of retired. I've been on a better, I quit my practice in 2019, this because I realized that medicine so just came from the science. And it's fine to really particularly were actually actively hurting people not understanding physiology quantities. So I'm going to see porous in 2020 and Stu Carter and this group is already volatile to that. So it's certainly evolved out of nowhere, which not really a plan and process. So tonight I asked Bob and Naviola talk to us. It's 102 yet again and I just didn't understand so the basic study covered three or four times. So we're going to start a we'll do a little bit of a rewind and just explain some of the things that Bob is does for us all dangerous sponsor of the modern country in the cell and how the trans how chronicles these are so different than a cuter's ease. And I'm going to basically be the moderator and ask Bob a bunch of hopefully not too many questions Bob. But bear with me. Okay. That's what today's all about. There's many questions as you want and we'll just take it where it goes. Okay. All right Bob, we want to do a shoot yourself and we'll start it here. Sure. Okay. So I'm Bob Naviola professor of medicine, pediatricics and and a pathology at the University of California San Diego. I've been here for about 30 years. And we study mitochondria from conception to old age. And that's the only thing that we study in the lab. So I guess so David asked me to start off with a little summary of mitochondria. And one way to start would be to say, I don't really want to overstate the importance of mitochondria. There only is important as for example the battery and motor of a Tesla car would be and cells without mitochondria would function about as well as a Tesla car without those two things. So it's important to think about you know mitochondria, though in a broader concept, there are true biological concepts, which is, you know, for a long time, it was relegated to the powerhouse of the cell. But you know, the last 20 years of of science have really showed us that that that metaphor, description has, you know, really, you know, how should I say, you know, it's not sufficient to describe what mitochondria do for the cell. So so in addition to energy mitochondria act as the coordinating center for all metabolism in the cell. And you know, and so if you imagine cells as receiving hundreds of streams of information in the form of chemical chemicals and metabolites, those are processed by mitochondria. And, you know, work products are produced that allow cells to do to grow and and repair themselves and to communicate with other cells. So anyway, so mitochondria are much more than powerhouses. They are actually coordinating centers for metabolism in the cell. And they are the first line of defense when a threat is, well, when a threat occurs. So one, one thing that's that I wanted to start with is maybe, you know, this description of the two problems of chronic illness that, that, you know, I see her two perspectives. And one is just, you know, I'll call the bottom up perspective and the other is the top down perspective. And I think, you know, maybe if I were to share a slide, we could, you know, talk a little bit about this. So in this slide, we have as a goal symptom relief and they're bottom up therapies that will address, you know, one problem, which is, you know, the persistence of cell danger signals and and high-percent activity to ATP signaling and also the dampened receptivity to system safety signals. And then there, top, excuse me, where did that go? Yeah, so, um, and then there are top down therapies that also address symptom reliefs. And now one of the, the difficulties that many clinicians run into is that they, you know, every master clinician knows that every patient is unique. They're unique biochemically, they're unique genetically. And so on the right, I have personalized therapies where patients are not aggregated because of the individual differences in clinical heterogeneity. And then the way that information of the results of treatments are reported is in case reports and clinical experience. But they're also generalized therapies that really, that address, you know, shared signs and symptoms of patients who are aggregated into groups. And that, you know, classical randomized clinical trials can actually help you despite, you know, individual differences. And one of the things that, you know, we noticed early on and doing our metabolomics work and actually has multi-home mix has expanded. So, you know, to, so that proteins and gene expression changes are, are, are evaluated as well. They're literally hundreds of unique metabolic and molecular changes that occur in each person who has a chronic illness. And in our studies, a metabolism about 75% of the differences in metabolism were unique to the individual. Okay. And, and actually reflected their unique and, you know, renewed, renewed the unique path to, you know, their current signs and symptoms. But 25% were shared by all the individuals with that, you know, particular chronic disorder, whether it's autism, PTSD, major oppressive disorder, golfordialness, you know, all the other disorders that we've looked at. This proportion seepness about the same. So, the generalized therapies are really directed at those, you know, shared abnormalities. And the personalized therapies are directed at the, the things that are unique to the individual. Okay. So, I'll leave it at that. And, and David, if you have a comment, I can, I can talk about it. I mean, here's a, here's a way of looking at the bottom up perspective of threat physiology where, you know, as a stress, as cells are exposed to, and systems are exposed to greater and greater stress, you move from housekeeping function to an increase, you know, a physiologic stress that occurs with the release of exercise, the ATP through gated channels in the cell membrane. And there can be acute danger that adds reactive oxygen to that's mild exercise. We'll also produce this, this, you know, three things, you know, more than three, but ATP reactive oxygen and Xanthine, and intense exercise adds, nor up enough for an epinephrine and leukotrine, for panic, you'll start, you know, observing when mitochondria start fragmenting. And then when DNA synthesis is blocked, there's another metabolite called deoxyidenocene that gets released. That, you know, it's also, you know, a mediator of innate immunity, even in worms. I mean, so, so, somebody, so, and C, elegance, you know, so, so it's, so these things are ancient ways of cells responding to stress. And I would argue, so on the one hand, you know, I know that the terms of danger anxiety, fear, panic, et cetera are affective terms that really people have definitions for at the behavioral level, but, you know, I would argue that when those things are experienced at the behavioral level, they are always associated with the cellular changes as well. Now, there are, you know, many variations once you start going beyond this, there, you know, different growth factors and, you know, anxiety.