 Okay. We're going to start a little bit of a different format this time. And we think that in general what's been happening on Fridays are small group meets the sort of the steering group of the polyvagal thing in the dynamic hearing process. And we just give the most interesting discussions. And we realize that that's why we started the group in the first place. It wasn't just to give lectures and just teach people ideas actually deepen our knowledge. And so what the biggest part of the group has been is just simply connecting silos. So we may or may not reach a lot of people in numbers, but what we're doing, we're actually get these really deep silos connecting, for instance, with the roots why Giverts, how you pronounce your last names of Giverts. We're just stunned to see he really did almost a, I think a Nobel Prize level work on muscle spindles from myology that is blooming away. And it has it really surface. Then Dr. Lane last week presented this data that the brain is a choice between emotional pain and physical pain. It chooses physical pain. It's a way you can see it externalize it. And humans don't tolerate emotional pain very well. So the data is, you know, I've just seen the data better, but just the concept makes sense. And we all know about cutting, but didn't realize with cutting, you actually get a significant relief, but you're leaving the emotional pain. It is somehow externalizing and conceiving. So it's not just a distraction, it's not just self-destruction. You actually get relief by creating physical pain instead of emotional pain. So this process is called, I want to talk about rats repetitive and pleasant thoughts. And I'll start with a story that about 15 years ago, I was in clinic and I have an intake spine questionnaire that people on a zero-tenscale about anxiety, depression and irritability. And four people came in between 45 to 60. They were highly professional. One was a real estate developer, very wealthy. Another one was a swatting guy. And really, you know, really solid people. And they had surgical lesions. They had alphyrdeicopathy. They had spinal ethyases. They were actually up for surgery. And I looked at the questionnaire and all of them had a 10 out of 10 on anxiety, depression and irritability. We're going, huh. So I asked them a simple question. They look, I have a choice to actually do in surgery on you and get rid of your leg pain or we can drop down your anxiety or if you live with the anxiety that you have in the rest of your life, that probably will get worse or any can, I'm sorry, get rid of your leg pain and live with the anxiety. We get rid of the anxiety and live with your leg pain. All of them instantly grab the leg and said, well, if you get rid of the leg pain, won't they help my anxiety? The answer is clearly no. It's a separate issue. So every one of them says, I can't tolerate the anxiety. They would, they would rather sort of deal with the leg pain than deal with the anxiety. So at that point, then two weeks later, two people in New York who had multiple surgeries and their spines were certainly damaged. I was really working on, again, a ridiculous pain. There was a scar tissue. I was trying to find reasons to do surgery on these guys and the same thing came up that they're both incredibly stressed and really it was the anxiety or after not the leg pain. So from that point on, I started realizing that the mental pain was a bigger problem than the physical pain. Then last week, answered a question about 15 years where Dr. Lane pointed out that the body doesn't look tolerate emotional pain that it'll actually choose physical pain or make up physical pain rather than deal with emotional pain. So what I'm doing as a physician is asking people to give up their physical pain so they could feel emotional pain which they tolerate even less. There's a tremendous resistance in the chronic pain world that people are giving up their pain. So Dr. Lane's paper answered a huge question. With my own ordeal, who most of you know about some detail from my book, Back in Control, I was socially isolated which is a big problem. I had 17 different physical mental symptoms. I've learned through this group that anxiety depression, OCD are all inflammatory metabolic disorders which I had no idea. I went to psychotherapy for 13 years and things got way worse and rate punishes non tonight. He'll look at this a little bit later but Ray and I was sitting on the chronic hobby shop and just go over the over how can I go from a fearless surgeon, truly fearless to crippling anxiety in one day. It may now sense to me. So I was in talk therapy once in twice a week for 13 soluteers. That's a lot of therapy. The thing is got way worse. The worst part of the process was the unpleasant repetitive thoughts that became just like missiles coming out of me every five to 10 seconds almost. And I never had them during surgery because I was so involved with the surgery that didn't seem to aff

... [Content truncated for debug file] ...