 Okay, here we go. So I should introduce Steve Vizrushka. He's an ear physician as a starting point. I taught Steve Arman who connected Steve with this group. Steve was actually in Costa Rica, celebrating his 50th wedding anniversary right now. I have to catch him between things. And he told me a part of us do this not in their direction is that he wrote a classic book called Tracking In The Paul, is that correct Steve? Yes. And so it's now been multiple editions. And that's how Steve actually went over in the Paul couple times. That's how Steve Oberman connected with Steve Vizrushka, who was a professor at the University of Washington. And then Steve Vizrushka will tell us about some of what he did in the Paul with public health, et cetera, then expanded into a global health effort. So he's extremely active and global health has some very interesting facts and thoughts on our global health issue. DR are you online yet? You there? I don't know if DR is talking to us yet. Nope. There you are. So DR, this is right down your alley. You went on this banwagon for a while about the societal factors affecting the threat versus safety. And so, Ms. could be really a little too talk. So, you know, he's Steve, welcome. And, well, she has started here. Thank you. Thank you very much. It's a privilege to be among these people. So, I have given myself the task of trying to give you a population health perspective. I treated individuals for 30, 40 years, but I want to take a population perspective. And, you know, I'm seeing here on squatting on stolen lands, but we don't do anything about it other than acknowledge it. So, I want to talk about our health status as a country, point out that we are seeing absolute declines, as the broad question, what determines health and answer it to say that politics is the most important factor. That we have to acknowledge the social, economic gradient as being everywhere. Talk about stress biology in inflammatory pathways. Make the point that inequality kills an early lifelast to lifetime and suggest that none of us in this country can escape dying younger than we should. And what kind of medicine do we need? Well, structural medicine. So, who am I? As I was telling David in 1969, I went to Nepal. And I befriended somebody who was working for USAID in family planning, and he gave me condom boxes of condoms to distribute in the hills. So, I wasn't going to demonstrate how to use them. So, I blew them up as balloons for kids, and they played with these balloons in these amazing mountain backdrops. On the basis of that, I wrote the first tracking guide book to the country. The eight edition came out in 2011, and I'm too lame to do it anymore. So, I went back to work in Nepal at a community health project, a week's walk from the road in the mid-70s, and my goal was to train local people locally using a minimal resources. So, I'm on the left showing Pema on the right how to cut a skin graph with a razor blade. You know, razor blades are ubiquitous, and they don't need to be sharpened. And so, after that experience, so I imagine working a week's walk from the road. In the mid-1980s, I set up a remote district hospital as a teaching hospital, and so again, trying to be appropriate technology. This is, I'm teaching Dr. Chetri Open Drop Ether. I have no skills as an anesthesiologist. I'm just self-taught. And so, then I got obsessed with the kind of ideas that I'm gonna talk about tonight, and I've tried to appear in as many different fora as I can to talk about these ideas doing TED talks, all this sort of stuff. And I'm a family man, my wife, son and daughter, in front of a master on a couple of years ago. So, dynamic healing as David said, have attended many sessions, and I see that you try to deal with individual illnesses and trying to expand yourself from the biomedical model. So, I come to this from a mathematics background that Harvard, I went to medical school at Stanford Public Health School at Hosspins. I've mentioned my work in Nepal, and I worked in the complaint department. That's what the emergency department is. And I just wanna share, you know, I've over 30 some odd years. I've heard many complaints and one early Saturday morning, a woman came in and said, she wanted to be admitted because she wasn't happy. So, you sort of hear it all. And so, I gained a lot of new perspectives that I'm teaching writing and talking about that, and I want you to consider a population perspective. So, what do I mean? I coined the term health Olympics 20 some odd years ago. Suppose health were an Olympic event, and the race was how long you lived, life expectancy. So, here we are, reaches most powerful country and world history. We spend almost half of the world's health care bill. I'd like to see, I'm trying to see where you are. Can you raise your hand if you think we win the gold medal? Longest lived country. Top five, six to 10, 11 to 15. I can't see you all. 2016 to 20, 21 to 30, sorry, 21 to 30. Anybody here, put us below 30? Okay, I see a couple of hands, all right. So, here is the, 2021 taught 45 countries ranked by, let's see, I gotta get rid of this. Cancel, okay. So, these are the top 45 countries ranked by life expectancy in 2021 with the data taken from the United Nations Human Development Report published in September and it only lists you and countries. So, what can we do by interrogating this table? Well, life expectancy in Japan is seven and a half years longer than ours. Is that just a few more years, drilling and immersing home, or is it significantly different? If we eradicated our three leading killers, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and COVID in 2021, we would gain about seven years, but still not the longest lived country. So ahead of us are all the other rich countries, some such as Chile or Thailand, Slovenia, not exactly Paragons of Good Health. So, why is this? I mentioned to David earlier and we had this discussion all the countries on this list, which country has the highest proportion of men smoking turns out to be Japan, about 45% of Japanese men smoke about 15% of American smoke. So, you can't explain this by personal behaviors. Can't explain it by health care. And so, what's going on? I sort of want to give you a sense of the lay of health around the world and just point out that if health weren't Olympic event, the race being life expectancy, we wouldn't be there for the final days for a few would have been to squalified in the trials. Now, it's much worse. The UN data present us in the best light because Taiwan is not a UN country in small populations such as the Vatican or Monaco or not there. So, when you add in all the countries and go to our CIA, world rankings website, we're down in the low in the high 50s. We can also look at a map of US life expectancy by county. So, this is a US county life expectancy in 2019 with an almost 30-year difference between the dark blue being the longest lived and the deep red, the shortest lived. Now, just glance at this and realize where are the reddish and yellow tones? Well, Appalachia, the Mississippi Valley, and then a bold red right in the middle there, not too far away from the height, from the deepest purple. So, the worst health in the country is on Pine region, the in reservation in South Dakota. Now, this is 2019. What happened between 2014 and 2019? Notice how the blue sort of slipped away and the red and yellow tones really became highlighted, suggesting that health is suffered major declines, health is measured by life expectancy over that five-year period. Well, what about after 2019? So, this is life expectancy changes for the rich countries and the United States. You can see us on the bottom from 2019 to 2021. So, we're not doing very well when it comes to having a long and healthy life, at least we're not living long. And if you stratify by racial groups as expected, the American Indians, the natives do the worst and people of Asian descent do the best. So, I think we have to agree that we're dead first. We die younger than people in so many other countries and most of us are unaware of it. So, that begs the question, what produces health and a population? Our longest live state is Hawaii. And it produced a, the Department of Health and Hawaii, produced a social determinants report in 2011. That's the cover on the right. And page two is the big graphic you see there. And they use a familiar scene in Hawaii, namely, a mountainside and the ocean. And they distinguish Muckai or downstream effects from Muckai or root causes. So, let's look at what's downstream. This is page two of the Department of Health and Hawaii's report. Downstream, you see in the ocean are all the chronic diseases that we get as we age and notice through in the water. What's on the shore? Well, the typical risk factors, smoking obesity, physical, and activity. Somehow, Hawaii puts these very far downstream. On the other side of the river is healthcare. For some reason, they've situated healthcare really far downstream. And much data on that. This is a graph of 10 countries life expectancy and healthcare expenditures for using purchasing power parity dollars. And you can see the blue line for Japan spending less than half that we do. And even at our good end, this is 2019, 95 to 2015. When we started, we're sorry, where we ended up, where the arrow is, is not even where Japan started 20 years before that. And most of us aren't aware of this. So, what is healthcare all about? Well, I played Dr. for some 35 years. And here we are, mopping up the floor with the vengeance we can't keep up with the flow. What has to be done? Anybody out there want to venture? Turn off the spigot, right? But whose job is that? Well, no one's in the United States. We don't want to do that, because it would threaten our livelihood. So in 2021, we spent four point two trillion dollars that's almost half of all the expenditures on healthcare in the world. It's one sixth of our total economy and almost $13,000 per person. And we have maybe 78,000, 80,000 million people certainly under insure. So what's above healthcare and risk factors? Well, what are classically termed the social determinants of health? poverty, pollution, pollution, racism, discrimination, and so on, income and wealth? What is Hawaii put above that? Social economic conditions. And above that is the root cause political context and governance. And so over the last 30 years, I've come to realize that politics is the major factor determining health. So I like to simplify things for my brain. Health has been improving most of the last century. Health improvements aren't shared equally. You can see that among countries and within the United States. And if we remember nothing else, remember poorer people have poorer health and early life is critical for adult health. So I wanna talk a bit about biology and how does it get under our skin? Because to understand health production, we have to recognize that we have biology at the micro level at the Oregon individual family level, states, nations and private and level. And then the global level, the guy hypothesis or the super organism. And the important thing to understand in biology is most markers have a social gradient. That is, people lowered down the social economic ladder, our worse off. And most of the disadvantage, the social disadvantage is hidden under the water. So it's like the iceberg. You know, you're lowered out in the economic ladder. You have a lot of chronic stress. There's a lot of dysregulation among all the various systems. And that leads to a lot of preclinical processes that accumulate over time and finally you get sick. So what's causing all this? It's stress. And stress can be good a response to a thread. It gets you out of danger. You know, I sought out stress in the mountains. I had, I recognized that I could be killed there but the benefits of that kind of stress I was willing to sacrifice my life to enjoy that. Stress is mostly brief. It takes minutes to hours. And it's good. It primes the brain and body. And when I was in public health school, if I wanted to solve a problem, I'd go for a run and come back and I could do it. But bad or toxic or tolerable stress, the chronic stress we face often, it's a response to an imagined threat. It's not fun. We have it over days to years, very common and low control. So let's look at the biology of stress and try to present the socioeconomic gradient there. You've heard of telemirs. They're the, like the shoelaces capping the ends of our DNA so they don't unravel. And so this is looking at telemirs length. The longer your telemirs by and large the healthier you are. As you age, your telemirs get shorter. White's have slightly longer telemirs that African Americans smoking is not good for your telemirs and getting bigger, higher BMI's is not good for your telemirs. So we have a lot of stress in this country. This is a street sign from Oakland, California in early 1980s. Stress at work, powerlessness is bad for your health. What's our response? Call 653, 6166, for stress counseling and family counseling. I think that's not gonna do it. And we are one of the most stressed countries in the world. Stress, there's no biomarker for stress that is available, but just here's a Pew Gallup poll on stress among countries in 2018. We were tied for fourth, and around the world. Well, I embraced a lot of the ideas of Stephen Porgus on polyvagal theory and faced with a patient with chest pain in the emergency department. If there was heart rate variability, I was less worried. So I took here ideas to heart. And so I wanna talk a little bit about the inflammation process in medical school I learned about possons, how all the white cells aggregate there to sort of neutralize the effect of that infection. So inflammation is a local response, but also people in this room no better than I do. It's systemically operating through cytokine, cytokines, it's initiated by stimuli. They can deposit lipids and blood vessel walls, create a lot of social and psychological stress. And we have this clinical markers, see reactive protein. And so do lower status people have more inflammation. Well, yes, they do. So this is a looking at sea reactive protein by income levels among whites, Chinese blacks and Latinx in the United States, and you can see the gradient there. Bruce McIwan coined the term alustatic load. I won't say much in that other than saying, it's sort of the cumulative load of stress over time that eventually we can do, and when the big stressor comes, you can't mount a good stress response. So we can measure elastasis by the parameters listed there on the right. And we can look at how those parameters rise as you get older on the upper left and PIR's poverty income ratio. The PURR you are, the higher your alustatic load as you get older with blacks having higher elastatic load than whites. Now those of you who do research, the first thing you do in your study is control for socioeconomic status. Why do you do that? You try to find some marker income education, race. And you ask people why they do that and they say, well, if we don't control for SES, we don't find an effect. What is that saying? The strongest effect is SES. And so we are basically leaving out anything to look at the strongest factor. So I'm trying to tell you that the socioeconomic gradient in health is pervasive. It was there in the Titanic. If you had a first class ticket, 60% survived, second class 40% through the classroom, through a quarter survived, take home lesson, always get a first class ticket on the Titanic. All right, so inequality kills. If you want to under, so that's the title of my book, inequality kills us all. And I will explore that. Well, I won't say much more about that because I have only have a few more minutes. But the other next idea is that early life is when roughly half of our health as adults is program. So as we started in diapers, go to Disneyland, Rockham Roll, masturbation, sex marriage career. I've had my colonoscopy. I haven't retired yet. I'm drooling. I am confused. I'll be back in diapers soon. It's before you go to Disneyland when roughly half of your health as an adult is program. And so you live in a womb with a view. That is the fetus through a trans placental transfer is observing the world outside. Is it going to be a nice nurturing world or is it going to be really hostile? And I'm going to have to come out early and fight for my life. So as we go from the erection to the resurrection, that now we say the first thousand days after conception is when roughly half of your health is an adult is program. A student of mine did this ignite talk and see adult on this topic. And this was her graphic illustrating the importance of the first thousand days. Well, what happens in the first period of time, you know, we have a lot of pain in this country and I don't want to, I can't talk much about attachment, but insecure attachment, probably leads is one of the major factors in leading to chronic pain. And we consume three quarters of the world's opioids and have the highest rate of opioid deaths in this country. And studies are suggesting we have more pain than people in other rich countries. So what have I said? I'm going to quote this in page three of the Institute of Medicine's report in which the title says it all. US Health and International Perspective shorter lives for health. Americans with healthy behaviors or those who are white and sure call a judge-ocated or an upper income groups appear to be in worse health than similar groups in comparison countries. How can we make sense of this? Well, let's remember, we're all composed of cells. Let's take a cardiac muscle cell. What does that cell need to be healthy? Well, oxygen and glucose, either prior to the cell of oxygen and glucose it dies. You have a coronary thrombosis. What does an individual need to be healthy? Well, not oxygen and glucose are feeding friends he suggests that more and more glucose isn't making us healthier. And if you give babies 100% of oxygen to breathe, they go blind to give it to adults. They get lung disease. So the best health advice for a component of ourselves, cell may not be the health advice, the best health advice for the individual. In public health, we take the individual health advice, right, don't smoke, wear a condom and broadcast it to the population. But are there factors affecting the health of populations that don't have any individual counterparts, such as what happens in Japan? So if you get the population factors right, what individuals do or don't do for their health doesn't matter so much. Meanwhile, what does medical care treat? Well, it treats cells. We give men still dinner fill via agro. We give aspirin for platelets. We give prozac or fluoxetine. These are treating cells, H2 blockers. If we treated individuals, we wouldn't have all the homeless people. If a homeless person came into the emergency department with his shopping cart saying, he'd been weakened dizzy for six months. I could spend a few thousand dollars on tests to see whether I had to admit them or not. But mostly I had a street him. If the nurse was nurses were cooperative, I could get him a meal, but not much more. So you've got to remember, medical care does not treat individuals and treating populations that's a whole other thing. So I'm at the end. I'm trying to stay within time. Whatever we do as health care workers, taking care of individual people, I think unless we address the political determinants of health, everything we do is not going to work. So this is my book published late last year with the title saying that all inequality kills us all. COVID-19's health lessons for the world. I've tried to summarize all of this material in its pages and suggest that what we need is this kind of a procedure. We need structural medicine. And we've got to take from the rich and spend it on early life. And let Papua New Guinea be the only country in the world who doesn't have a nationally mandated paid maternity leave policy. So I'm going to end there. Hopefully on time, this is my email. Happy to entertain discussion. And so I will stop sharing and we can spend the rest of the time. With your thoughts. So thank you. That was unbelievable talk. And guinea stick is dearly versus individual versus population, et cetera. So I'd like to do there's a lot to unpack here. And as you know, there's a quickly disarranky session about all the troubles. So we sort of all know the troubles that they're in the health care system. And so I think all of us have seen this in medicine for years. And I want to start with DR for a second who has a very clear idea in this. I give a talk to tenors in my practice that physicians were in to help people where responsibility or population, but the CalPAR medical association made a statement that a responsibility isn't just to patients, but also to society as a whole. There's that level of responsibility. And so we're going to try, if you're going to just keep the comments relatively brief, so I want to get a lot of different comments. This is a huge, the helpful talk very lightning. It gives a perspective. But I guess my personal challenge is what can we do as a action to take some action, selectively help them with this process forward? Because we wear your hands a lot medicine. We have opposition stress, et cetera, et cetera, burn out. And nothing never really changes. So that's one of them goals in this group is where are some ideas and things we actually can do? So obviously massively huge problems. The thing the elephant that really, really strikes me is that, I mean, other countries being up doing great, I mean, obviously a lot of improvement that can be done in every country, but our country is way worse. I mean, it's hard to believe with the resources we have that there's some basic horribly core issues that we're doing that are making our country really unhealthy. So that's the elephant in the room to me. I mean, obviously healthcare in Japan could be better even, but look at us. I mean, it's unbelievable. Do you have any thoughts to start the conversation? Please jump in on trying to answer questions well, which we quickly and we'll keep going through. But that's a lot of unpack here. Here we go. So start it. Well, yeah, thank you for the talk. I mean, this is so much where our focus has been without a clear plan of how to solve it. So I just think that our medical model is one that is focused on genes, antigens, the allergens, pathogens, and structure. And that's it. And that is not the determinedness of being healthy and happy. So we need a dramatic shift in kind of the focus of healthcare and doing it at a population level or a societal level. But the question still remains is, what would be the logical pieces to put in place to make this better? And I have my own thoughts, which people have heard before, is that one of the issues with our culture is that we're so focused on individualism, rugged individualism, you know, pick yourself up by your bootstraps, which is impossible. And the magic of capitalism and my argument is always been capitalism is good for allocation of certain resources. But it doesn't take care of a society. It doesn't address safe transportation and a defense system. And it also doesn't address public health needs. And so I feel like that as much as we like to target all of the things that are wrong and medicine, that until we make that shift, a cultural shift, and then a political shift to incorporate some of the values of socialistic practices such in this Scandinavian countries, we're just going to continue on this sort of downward spiral. And then my final comment is the one thing that we have, or I've moved away from, is talking about stress per se and really formatting in terms of the different threats that we experience in life, whether it's, you know, transgenerational threats that are pastuous and epigenetic coding or physical threats emotional threats, social threats, or mental constructs and mental threats, and even spiritual threats. And that those, though that threat load, versus an allestatic load that threat load, is dissectable to find that, you know, those different determinants, and you can kind of check the boxes and try to address each one of those. And ultimately, it's not just eliminating threat, I think we have to start practicing, you know, the things that move us into the physiology of safety and help us to actually heal and thrive, versus just survive. So that's, you know, that's what I love to spend time trying to, you know, crack the nut of, you know, we know the problem and, and, and, and how, how do you solve it? And I really don't know. I think that's what be great if this group invested in. Thank you, dear. Any thoughts? Can I make a statement? Yeah, absolutely. So, yes, Americans are very individualistic, but we have the capability of responding to a threat and when we become aware of it. And I can remember 1957, Russians launched Sputnik and suddenly here was this satellite orbiting the earth and sending a signal to earth and we realized my God, you know, they got to space ahead of us and so we launched a space program with the goal to land a human on the moon by the end of the next decade. And guess what, we were successful. So if we recognize collectively the threat and we are aware of it, then we can respond, but nobody knows that we're dead first. And so I think communicating these ideas is the first step. John Kington, a political scientist at University of Michigan, said, there are three things that have to happen for major changes, major political changes in the United States. First is, people have to be aware of a problem. They have to agree on a potential solution. And those two things work in most other countries, but in the United States, Kington discovered you need a transforming event. Might be Sputnik in that case. It was the invasion of Vietnam led to all of the issues in the 60s that eventually led to our... It's not how we lost people. We cut out their second history. So we need to understand, well, people have to realize that we're dead first. And they have to realize that medical care is not the reason, although that may be necessary. We may have to go to, well, we should go to the University of Healthcare. There's no reason. We already spend more money on healthcare than at the government level than countries that have universal healthcare. So all we have to do is convince the American people that it's in their interest. But all the other countries that have universal healthcare realize it doesn't solve the problem. Poor people there still have poor health. So we, it's obviously a long and complex issue but creating awareness is the first thing. And I think you, doctors and other healthcare workers have tremendous opportunities to do that. For example, you can have grand rounds on these subjects. You can do this at the bedside. I would talk to patients and their families in the emergency department about this. Obviously not during a code, but people recognized, you know, what I did was not blame people for their behaviors. I used to blame my patients for the bad behaviors that ended up in the emergency department. Once I realized your pan was the longest live country and had so many smokers and didn't die from smoking in the ways that Americans did, I had to change my mind. And I think changing your mind is one of the best ways of discovering whether you still have one. I'm Chair, are you had a, care, or you had a very interesting common push your handers up. And you know, so you don't think about the size, it's not a really good common to my lesson, you had to follow them. But tell me, you raise your handerware, we're gonna comment. And I think at least what they need to consider today which is that right at the very top of the sequence actually political and you think about it why this is interesting because we have technology to do anything we want to anybody. You know, it's an access issue, is a massive issue. And so it's not like we don't know what to do, we don't know how to get it to everybody. And so the politics at the top of that tree is extremely interesting information to me. Anyway, can I, you had a comment? Sure, yeah, sorry. I'm pretty new to the group. I wasn't sure about the protocol with whether you put it in the chat or erase my hands. But yeah, I'm a medical anthropologist. I worked primarily in North and West Africa studying mental emotional health and particularly arts and health, the way they mitigate or help manage trauma. And what are my observations is how much emotions and the self or even the mind are conceived of very differently across culture. I think it's just an interesting point to add in in terms of when we think about social determinants of health. I work with a really minority population in North Africa that would fall into one of the most discriminated against populations there. And there are physical health problems, but they have these healing rituals that they conduct on a regular basis that are music and dance related. And when they seem to be, this is kind of their way of helping to manage that. So anyway, I'm thanks for such a fantastic talk and your turns of phrase quite brilliant as well. Thanks very much. So, but what's the, okay, that's interesting to you very disadvantaged population. Our, my people effort is actually in my wife's and actually going towards music dance art as the healing modality, which is it well accepted in medicine and of course, it's a slave in America, which is heinous. And you know, their music obviously is a fact of them surviving in any level with any degree of sanity. And there's done a report music in art in medicine as a way of healing, but again, it's quote not scientifically enough for people. So can you just give an essence, use it in a previous way, give us the way they cope with their stresses compared to us. Can you give us that in a nutshell? We're not talking about that. Sure, I'll attempt to, what got me into studying this culture was actually by way of music. In my first career, I was a musician and composer and wanted to travel the world's studying other musical systems. And then when I landed in North and West Africa, I found out that music is the primary healing modality there in terms of trauma. So I work with the descendants of slaves from the trans-Saharan slave trade. So there was a trans-Saharan slave trade as well as trans Atlantic. So these are people who are the descendants of slaves that have developed these music and dance ceremonies to process the trauma. And it's non-verbal. It's complete. It's an all-night long ceremony. It's been practiced for at least 150 years. So I've been working there for less 15 years in Morocco and Algeria studying this and trying to bring in what we know in our Western medical system but also thinking across culture about, I mean, just as a small example there, emotions are often thought of being outside the body, not just inside the body, but that they circulate almost like contagion. So you can pick up grief from an environment, which isn't that strange and you think about walking into a room and feeling the atmosphere and this kind of thing. So I'm fascinated by all these differences and how we might try to integrate different cultural understandings, does every culture require a different kind of approach or are there lessons we can learn from each other in this way? But yeah, music and dance is the primary way of emotional healing there. I'd like to get a statement. She's coming to the second, my own Rob Lustig and Rage's hand, Rob Yedikaman. So Dr. Badrushka, you've tried to reduce this down into simple concept, the social determinants of health and I understand that. And I understand you're looking for root cause, but I've got, I think a router cause for you and it's one word, you're not gonna like it. Sure. No, well, you're getting close. You're getting close. The antidote to fear, serotonin. Okay. The everything that you identified in terms of deaths of despair, serotonin deficiency, music, serotonin, ex uh, uh, uh, repleation, antibiotics, serotonin, depletion, and we can go through the entire litany. Ultimately, it comes down to diet. You know, if you look at the health expenditure versus life expectancy graph, we fell off the rails in 1980 and have been going off ever since. And it's cause our diet changed. And now other countries' diets are changing as well. And they're now experiencing the same problems we are. Everything that basically substitutes carbohydrate for, um, triptophane, uh, and things that ultimately alter triptophane metabolism, for instance, uh, uh, antibiotics, uh, various oxidative stressors in the liver which turned, uh, triptophane to cayerinine instead of serotonin, reduce the amount of serotonin in the gut so that ultimately it can't go via the affron fagus up to the nucleus tract of solitarias. Alter a migdola response increase toxic stress can't, uh, you know, calm down, uh, and therefore, uh, drive a cortisol production, which has been shown on its own to be, uh, you know, a primary, uh, uh, uh, driver of chronic disease and mortality. So I would argue with you and I was very specifically listening to your talk and waiting for the word diet. And it didn't come up. So let me ask, I'm going to ask you to redo your talk and put diet at the front. So I, you know, I used to be a vegan. I practiced all these dietary, uh, scruples and then I learned that, uh, the healthiest prefecture in Japan used to be Okinawa. And I had read that the diet and the sound of an audience, right? Uh, was pork fat and noodles. And then I went to Okinawa and what did I see? You go to the market. Big slabs of pork fat and, uh, you know, I went to people's homes. They ate this stuff which I thought would be absolutely toxic, but they have a phrase in in Japan, how do you hot you boo? Stop eating when you're 80% full. So they eat stuff that I would consider unhealthy. I don't want to eat that. What's wrong with pork too much? What's wrong with pork fat? So I think this stopped just for saying, so this is interesting to me because, um, this will have to talk once again. So this is a great topic because, I think I heard from our last just talk that fat and proteins even meat, etc. is a lot easier. You know, basically, fruit fructose or is poison. And so, but fat and I think Robby brought this out when you talk that the food industry sort of made that the demon and actually fat is actually not the demon. It's the fructose. Right. Right. We're getting this correct. Exactly. So what you, so see what's interesting. And that's being she gets some cross conversation here because, um, the, and then there's also say, chitters almost had this podcast out to the group who, in a word, there was a succession of proteins, schizophrenia, and bipolar, but they're very ketogenic diet with no heart, heart-dain carbs at all. But if we mark what turns around in their mental status, then what deers taught us is with the, with ketones in general, they're highly anti-inflammatory. And so it's, so what we consider healthy for is unhealthy. The fun thing I'll say about the diet is that some, they got, they say, college is the road, the book they can fast and slow. Funny how to stress, I mean, rigid diet is actually kind of productive with the actual diet. I think both of you are to agree with that. But anyways, this is interesting. I, I don't want to table, I think we should have a conversation around this again, Rob, um, for a group. Um, but extremely good point. I think this is, to be brought out a little bit more that fat is not bad. It's, it's the right fats. Protein's are not bad. If it's the right protein. And but unequivocally, fructose is essentially a poison. And I think Rob's got that in my brain really clear. Do I have that right Rob? You got that absolutely right. It is a chronic dose dependent mitochondrial toxin. Yeah. And so let's move on to some of the, the comments here. We have about 10 minutes steeper distance. A lot of here with the, what, um, Kramer said about the correlation, musically, center of the, the social inequality, we know is a problem at every level. Homelessness, it doesn't matter what it is. But I do think that clearly politics is interesting issue to consider. And then this would tend to wash our hands of that issue. And again, this person 10 years ago wrote an article, playing with doctors to get politically involved. Is that actually part of her responsibility? Um, anyways, deportation, then see what I'm just curious about. Sorry. I just would like to, first of all, love the talk. And thanks for the plug. But let's start off with what I think is is really going on and what is right and what's wrong. I think what you find in different cultures in a different level of social interaction or sociality in which our own, the social behaviors are the anti stressors. The social behaviors are the regulates of the ziology. So I'd like to talk about sociality as a neuromodulator. And what, when we start talking about stress, what we're talking about is disruption of homostatic function. And that can be acute and short and with rapid recoveries. And that's really what you love. And we all love that. But the issue is what happens when it gets, uh, what we lose that homostatic function, it doesn't come back. The other thing, when we even talk about food, talk about medicine, talk about procedures, we have to talk about how the nervous system welcomes food, welcome side interventions, or is it, uh, is it said medicine, the patient is in a state of fear. And so their bodies are not well feeling. And this brings me to my final point. And that is this focus on end organs and not about the nervous system's regulation of the organs. So we start looking at disease from the internist world, for you, which is leading an assay for the organ, not on the neuroregulation of the organ. Now we bring it all together. Let's be talked about stress or adolescent, you're really talking about when is the neuroregulation of the internal organs being disrupted. And that's the flag. And that's the heart rate variability that you were looking at. If the heart rate variability is still going on, you can see some of those feedback loops still working. And that means the body is still in charge. And again, our medical worldview is, you basically fix things by putting stuff into the system. And we lose respect for what the nervous system does as a system in processing what we do to it. Great talk, thank you. Yeah, well, Steve A. comments, Bruce, Mr. Scher. Well, yes, I mean, this is such a sort of a complex issue. But first of all, pork fat and noodles. And if we look at diets in among hunter-gatherers, they vary from almost exclusively fat among the endu and the Eskimo, traditionally to the Kalahari Bushman with some meat, but a lot of roots and things like that. And so I think we can adapt to a variety of different diets. And I agree with Robert, sugar is a comfort food. Sugar and fat are comfort foods. And with the nutrition, with the nutrition transition from basic diets to highly refined process foods. You know, we crave, salt, we crave sugar, and we crave fat. And you know, you can, you can, you don't have to take any time to prepare them. You can be ready to eat them in minutes. It's a, it's very hard to try and counter that. So, but I would, but I would still push the need to address the political factors that create the environment that make us, you know, dead first. The make us have such short, rather unhappy lives. I mean, happiness has been declining in this country for quite some time too. It's not, it's not a healthy situation. So a couple of comments to that, you know, if you, if those of you who didn't hear Rob's talk, he said the archives, um, does it just spare? He looks at the diet that uses cell phones, um, and, you know, the desert to spare, factor, which is, um, very compiling. So let's work with it. He also compared, don't forget to share a tone on the happiness versus pleasure seeking, again, all very good points. So I'm on that suit Carter have the last word. Sue, are you giving the last word today? I just, I just like, we, we, my particular, I'll have my last word for Suez, her last word. May my challenge to the group. I don't care, position or not, is that it's not just three spots for me to our patients and friends and family. But you know, try to get upstream to the policy makers of what we're doing. And I will say what Rob did in his book. I also have highly recommend a book called Back Chance, which he just seems to go through the biochemistry of food. That book, I'm a total diet and I'll let space, I mean, it's certain. I, that book changed my life. He just goes through the biochemistry of food, doesn't get rich in about things. The points out what food does what, you know, concentrated food versus pulp, etc. It's really well done. And but he also pointed out the 10 major food companies controlling the entire world's food supply. So it's sort of doing to the world with this smoking people who did back in the 60s. I mean, it's just a disaster. So that's, is not a coincidence that six trillion world's population, I'm a six billion US is either overweight or obese. You know, why is that? It's not, is that there's a big, global change. So again, a different topic for another day, but again, sue for my resume actually be the last person. Because I do think as clinicians, we tend to ice-sare cells into which right in front of us, but not necessarily thinking bigger picture broader spectrum. We know social connections are big deal, which 52% of our Americans are socially isolated, big problem. So anyway, so many thoughts for the day? Yeah, breastfeeding and lactation. This is where you're going to have to start. It protects every baby. It protects the mother. And of course, it contains the ideal food for an infant for that first thousand days. Okay. That's really, really, it's very good solid point. When sue speech, everybody listens. Wow, that was concise. Steve, any final comments tonight? We honestly, there's a huge topic you covered really quickly. It gives them really nice things to consider due to the fact that you know, it was really concise and clear. So anyway, any final thoughts for us tonight? Yeah, I want to highlight some recent studies that looked at state politics in the United States and life expectancy trends from 1958 to 2017. It's a paper in the Milbank Memorial Quarterly. And what they did was they looked at life expectancy gains from 1958 to 2017. And they found there wasn't a very big gap in 1958. They used the Louisiana and Connecticut as examples, a small gap in 58 and by 2017 a huge gap. And they correlated those with the liberal versus conservative state policies. And similar other studies have looked at the six longest live states and and the shortest live states. And you know, a state who has liberal policies such as support for early life as Sue mentioned, reproductive rights, taxation that is more progressive, criminal justice system that doesn't put everybody in jail. And so the more liberal state governments were associated with much more much stronger life expectancy gains and actually for the most conservative states, the six at the bottom, life expectancy was pretty well stagnant from the 1980s out to 2017. So what that really, I mean the hardest thing for I think Americans to realize is that their health is beyond their control. It really devolves to political policies. Yes, we have the right to vote, but our country is so fractured now politically that it's going to take a lot of work to to marshal us against, you know, to get people to one and not die so young. And it's the problem is is similar to our climate crisis. You know, it's the the results are in data. It's slow, it's progressive. It's like the turning up the temperature and the beaker with the frog inside. And we are not aware of this slow transformation that is killing us much like the climate crisis is doing the same. So I think it takes all of us to create awareness of these ideas in whatever means we can and work for change and you know, I would if I could read the last thing of the book. Can I do that as a book reading? It's a poem. Absolutely. All right. It's by March Piercy, it's called the Low Road. What can they do to you? Whatever they want, they can set you up, they can bust you, they can break your fingers, they can burn your brain with electricity, burn you with drugs so you can't walk, can't remember, they can take your child while up your lover, they can do anything, you can't stop them from doing. Are you stop them? Alone you can fight, you can refuse, you can take what revenge you can, but they roll over you. Two people can keep each other sane, can give support, conviction, love, massage, hope, sex, three people are a delegation, a committee, a wedge, with four you can play bridge and start in organization. With six you can rent a whole house, eat pie for dinner with no seconds and hold a fundraising party. A dozen make a demonstration, a hundred fill a hall. A thousand have solidarity in your own newsletter, 10,000 power and your own paper, 100,000 your own media, 10 million your own country. It goes on one at a time. It starts when you care to act. It starts when you do it again after they say no. It starts when you say we and know who you mean and each day you mean one more. Wow. Okay, well, that's something, if you say me that poem I like to just give you that to the group of the next announcement that would say remarkable poem. It did probably it keeps each one of us in this group. 12, you want to step into time, you know, it's as to start with us and so yeah, no thank you very much to you those as good as expected and those remarkable so thank you. My pleasure. All right, thanks everybody.