 accepted a hierarchy within the nervous system. And in fact, so in the sense that we tend within the world we live in, think that it's cortical centric. So the cortex regulates the world. When in reality, it's really very brainstormed survival mechanisms that are really driving things. And the issue is, first is the acknowledgement of that hierarchical relationship. And then the issue is literally, how do you tame those survival circuits and not reinforce them? So there's a paper that I was part of dealing with obsessive thought, basically with alcoholics who are abstaining. And basically showing that vaguely, especially the brainstem interaction or regulation of organomics, the metric that I've developed was literally the mediating variable of the connectivity in the cortex. So in a sense, explaining exactly what you're saying, basically saying if your survival brains that mechanisms are coordinated and well regulated and not locked into survival, then the emerging properties at higher levels are, they do what they're supposed to do. Exactly. I mean, that's a better explanation. And then Bob, you had your comment about the mitochondria dysfunction with these thought patterns. Yeah, well, so that's, so the first thing I would say it's not dysfunction. It's just misinformation. So the mitochondria are actually functioning according to what they are being, the signals that they are receiving. So they're doing precisely what they're told in chronic illness. So this is the difference for me is in acute illness, symptoms are basically the cell is the object of the damage. But in chronic symptoms, cells are the subject of the damage. So we're subject of the symptom. I shouldn't say. Yeah, I like the problem is that as soon as you go down the rabbit hole of damage and dysfunction, you get off the rails. Yeah, that's not happening in chronic illness. Because chronic illness is an actively maintained state. OK, that's a complete maintained state. It requires energy. It requires resources that actually siphon away critical resources from healing in order to maintain the state of, you know, threat alert. OK, so basically the ability, DEF CON, whatever. So if you start out in DEF CON 4 and DEF CON 1 is thermonuclear war, you know, like you're removing up the chain. And those are your ruts, OK? But the problem is is what we've learned from animal models, experimental models. And this comes from lots of interesting genetic knockouts of endocannabinoid receptors, knockouts of mitochondrial fusion proteins. So like the mitochondrhydocardins. And they're intimate connection with the immune system. And memory, specifically these adverse memories. So aversive memories come up spontaneously when safety signals are inadequate. Got it. So this is exactly my point with this whole process. So I'm going to send grandios here for a second. But what's both you said really just goes all the way to the core because that's a huge comment, which you're right. I can see this clearly. The chronic disease and actually maintain state. That's pretty darn different than I think with the world. Things about we think it's already chronic static state. That's a result of this and this. And that's a huge factor because you're consuming resources to maintain that state. And we announce safety, the body actually heals and regenerates. And that's what's so fascinating about this process. When the patients I see actually heal their face changes or expression changes, they look different, they act different. They feel different. I mean, body actually regenerates. The other part is with cond, during, it's pretty common in chronic pain, they have cognitive dysfunction. And the brain fog and I had it. I could not, I could do what I needed to do for my job. I couldn't process the information. And so the brain physically shrinks in chronic pain. And when you treat chronic pain, it actually physically re-expans. And so what you both said is really fascinating. So do you have a short-term question? David, David, I have a real suggestion. Don't make general lies statements like the brain shrinks. There are specific areas that I agree on. That's dangerous. There are specific areas that are happening because they're not being integrated and norally regulated. So you have to be more specific in doing that because I would say the brain stem areas are not shrinking. If anything, they're becoming more vigorous under those situations. Oh, interesting. Hi, it's exercising. You got it. You got it. Yeah, so you got to change the model for mythology to adaptive success under context or features that you may not really personally like. But they're adaptive successes. So even the brain fog, you know, like so. So it turns out that hypometabolic survival states are everywhere in nature. Like literally everywhere, they go down to, you know, like I don't know, you've played as a kid with a little brain shrimp that actually have, you know. Sea monkey, sea monkey. Sea monkey's okay. That under conditions of stress, they go into stasis. Yeah. And we study this in the laboratory. You know, it's called Dauer in Cena-Rab data, right, data, you know, elegance. So see elegance. And it's, you know, a phase of development that is an option for them when they find that the environment is hostile. Okay. And what's bizarre about it is that an animal that would normally live, go through its life cycle in two weeks, can survive for four months. You know, with being hypersensitive to, you know, environmental change is interesting. Lee, because they have to, like, you know, have their, you know, their sense is aware that the environment has gotten better in order to come back. But what's wild is, is once the environment improves even after four months, they just gradually, the dimmer switch flicks back on again. And they, it's as if that time did not pass. Wow. Okay. So if you're able to enter into that state, it's a state of kind of biological stasis that protects you from the environment. Okay. That's, you know, it's probably, you know, it's a condition that we see in MECFS chronic fatigue syndrome. It's not maybe, you know, it's, it, it, it, it, it, it, but it's important in lots of, lots of thinking, I think, and the way that the way that evolution has learned that organisms can survive during hardship is you just dial down the amount of energy that they require from their environment. So what do you think about the social isolation, social isolation factor in chronic pain? I mean, would you just set us interesting? Because I'm also finding out a lot of people have a tremendous amount of social anxiety, even a little bit, a little bit a lot of it. And they'll, so the data shows that 53% of Americans are socially isolated. You can still be in the middle of a family and feel socially isolated because you start with drawing. And that's a huge problem for me. Then I just piles on a cell where I thought the social isolation and loneliness was one of the worst parts of my ordeal by far. It was horrible. So, but if you're, if you're just trying to survive, it feels like that part of the brain sort of disappears in a way. Right. Well, so that's been studied in, so this is something called xenohormesis where an organism senses safety and danger in the environment. When the environment's dangerous, they shift resources away from reproduction to survival. So the little nematode worms, they're not mating during the, you know, during the sun, you know, that's, you know, they're endowar during the stress condition. It's a little bit unfair because only 10% of them are heterosexual anyway, and 90% are, you know, hemaphyridites. But this overall process happens in water buffaloes as well. So water buffaloes that eat, you know, stress, like water stressed plants on the serengeti, or actually, you know, these are, well, anyway, you know, so, well, they, they, that the stress, you know, stress plants make more resveratrol, the resveratrol activates this stress, you know, responses, is the, you know, the red wine response, that shifts again, resources away from reproduction toward survival. Now, hemaphyrites talked about this cost of, you know, cost of survival as, or, you know, that, you called it ponos. In a ponos, it, it, it, it, P, O, N, O, S, it has been, sometimes mis-translated as pain, but it's actually not. Okay. So so ponos was an elemental god, you know, that, what that symbolized the eternal struggle, struggle against, hardship. Okay. And the struggle is energy requiring. So that's why you keep getting back to mitochondria, but it's also resource requiring. Okay, so mitochondria being the hub of the wheel of metabolism, you know, decide whether those amino, the branch and amino acids, for example, go to making new proteins or are used to make energy. Okay, and under conditions of safety, like when they're, you know, when they're being told by the brainstem that the world's safe, then they'll shift things toward, you know, growth and reproduction and social interaction. You know, mitochondria are naturally social. Okay, they're naturally social. They want to fuse with other mitochondria. Okay, but one of the first things that happens in stress is those fusion proteins are downregulated. So they fragment and, you know, from, you know, some from Sue's point of view, they, you know, they, they don't form attachments very well. Okay, so, you know, so that's amazing. So yeah, we have to get this conversation written down. If it's, do you have a written version of what you're saying? Well, a lot of it, I put into the, you know, like even the Pono stuff, I put into the recent salogenesis paper. I mean, I think it's hard, it's hard to actually, you know, without conversations like that. And, you know, this kind of, you know, the, the dialogue, I think it, you know, as, as Socrates noted is very educational. So we all, we all are learning, you know, as we speak with one another. Yeah. I'm blown away. This is very, I'm listening to, of course, it's very polyveg old. You talk, Steve talks about the parts of the Vegas that are in conservation mode, the Dorsal Vegas versus social engagement. So what really we learn from Bob here is that this crosses every level of organismic organization. This is a property probably of life on Earth. Yes, it is. So every, every multi cellular organism, actually even plants that don't have a nervous system, they do, they go dormant, yeah, plants go dormant. Yeah, they have primitive nervous system. Right. Well, they do. And it turns out they'd also gets down to, you know, ATP signaling, danger signaling, and, you know, and glutamate signaling. I, you know, I have a nice little video I can show where if you, like if a cricket makes a little, you know, bite on a, on a, on a leaf, and you add a drop of ATP or glutamate to that, it, you know, in, in, um, a erudopsis that has been a rabidopsis that's been modified to floresce when calcium is released. You know, you see this wave of calcium moving across the, the plant from the point of adding, you know, ATP or glutamate to the little cricket bite. Um, so it's, it's really, yeah, so this is, it's ancient. This is, you know, something it's a property of all life. And, and actually this, the, the, the silencing of aversive, thoughts and memories is an active process. Yeah, it's, it's active. It's not a passive process. It doesn't happen spontaneously. It only happens when regularly and periodically reinforced. So, so the other problem that you get into is everything healthy from the brain comes in pulses. Okay. This is, this is, everything, you know, dangerous body comes constantly. Okay. Can I ask Bob to kind of clarify? Part of the pulses is actually there's a rhythmicity there too. So it's a feedback loop. So the pulses that you're seeing are really the output of a feedback loop. And where David gets locked into is, he's seen the outcomes of feedback loops that stop working. Bob and I live in a world of feedback loops. And all they are doing is telling you different adaptive circuits. And the real one that you're focusing on is one that I've been stumbling around that is the metabolic costs of, of fight flight. It's just too much for an organism to maintain. And so you start getting this chronicity. And so I think chronic illness is really driven by a signal of metabolic cost of fighting. It can't do it. Yes. That's right. It's just, you know, I mean, there's, you can't steal from Peter to pay Paul without making Peter a poor man. So like, it's, it's like, if there's a finite amount of internal energy and resources, if those are being diverted for defense, yeah, danger, then they're not available for love. I use the Star Trek analogy of Scottie get me to defend shields. The defense shields take energy. And you don't have now you can't fight or you can't even flee because they take energy. Right. So the other level of this that that I know we keep coming back to is that what happens? So the in, so there's a different, I don't know, there, I do have a little a quick one slide summary of, you know, the last 30 years of our workouts. I think that I could share that kind of, you know, could, could help illustrate some of this. But the concept is that when there is an acute injury, the first thing that sells in the periphery do is they actually disconnect from the central control system. Okay. They sit like even if the brainstem is working. Okay. You know, and it always is obviously, but you know, they will actually pay attention to boots on the ground data. Okay. In a broken ankle or, you know, a mosquito bite or whatever it's up to. That starts to explain dissociation and so-called psychosis. Yeah. So that's the very first thing that happens. And, and, you know, and then to come back to, to help, you know, you first have to fix the local damage. And then you gradually have to reconnect with, you know, the mainframe. Okay. So, and then the mainframe is then re, you know, restart. It's just hold that point. So it's the reconnection, which is the treatment models. And this is- and this is the signals of safety to allow the feedback loops to re-engage. But that is- It's quite a deep treatment, too full. It's turn off the danger signals, which can still exist. And then- Yeah. And then- Yeah. Even when the damage has been repaired. Yeah. I call it a passive and an active strategy. The passive one is turning off the danger signals and allowing safety to come in. But the active strategy is the actual neural exercise of testing that feedback loop. Yes. Yeah. That's it. So guys, the- there's, it suddenly seems that everybody I know is on ketamine or being prescribed ketamine, which I- I sent some of that to David on because the claims- I don't know how accurate they're on ketamine. Actually, we need to get this one on mute. Can you put your phone on mute? We have an echo. So what I think happens there, and they claim- this is their big claim. Have you worked with Bob with any of the- or David with anyone on- ketamine? Yeah. Yeah. I have. And we- well, when you say anyone that they have long years in a tail, they're mice. But, you know, so- so- I have. And we've actually done some interesting studies that we published a while ago. You know, I did this work with Laura Dunin, who's now, yeah, at Vanderbilt. But anyway, if you, if you, you know, kind of- give a mouse a compound that floresces with, you know, when it's exposed to reactive oxygen, superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. You can actually use a laser to go through and intact the head, the cranium, the skull of the mouse in a living mouse without doing anything else. And you can measure the amount of, you know, reactive oxygen that's produced in response to any kind of stimulus that you might use. And so we, you know, we use saline, we use, you know, pulses of glucose, and we use ketamine. And it turns out that ketamine produces this really- this burst of reactive oxygen in the brain that was sex determined. It was different, you know, so it was, you know, it turns out that there's, you know, females have a better capacity to handle that stress than males. And so, you know, we're talking about mice, okay, like I'm not, you know, but the female mice had a better capacity and they did not show what the males showed afterwards. This is actually a schizophrenia model in mice, okay, so it turns out that when you, you know, do this in mice, there's an acute response that, you know, happens. But then there's this long-term response that produces social withdrawal, that anxiety, that, you know, the fear of entering open spaces, you know, all sorts of interesting, you know, mouse behaviors that have been, you know, tied as analogs to, you know, human schizophrenia. But anyway, so, so, like it's just so difficult to make, sometimes to make, you know, these general statements about, you know, the action of a compound because there's very profound sex differences. Yeah, that's been depressing talking. Yeah, well, yeah, so, so, you know, really, I mean, these are important things that I think one of the, these are landmines that you can get into, you know, that you have to, you know, like be careful about, you know, general general statements. But anyway, well, so I got off on ketamine, but I, you know, I'm sorry, she think ketamine is useful and not useful, I couldn't quite follow that. Oh, that depends on what you want. So, so, I think pulses of ketamine, well, so yeah, this gets into an area that I'm not, I don't want to, you know, be, I'm not in a position to have an authoritative statement on ketamine. Okay, so I, I think I'll, I'll bypass that my general, look, I, first of all, I do think that pharmaceutical enhanced psychotherapy, you know, is a, is, you know, can be a useful, you know, step toward healing. Okay, I think, you know, that's, but, you know, the specific, you know, drugs or mushrooms that you choose, you know, I'm, you know, not going to get into. So, what I, I was given an assignment by Robert Dancer about two months ago, and because he, he edits journals, and there's so much attention to psychedelics. So, I've been trying to use the literature, I bet Mel knows more than I do about this, but the basically ketamine probably does not work through serotonin. That's what the literature claims. It works on the glutamate, glutamatergic system, it disrupts glutamate, GABA, that's the current thinking. It has an effect on serotonin, but its positive effects are probably, because unlike the other psychedelics, all of the other psychedelics I've found so far, because they give you a lot of dissociation, not, I mean, ketamine at high doses probably flips over to the serotonin pathways, but in the micro dosing that they're using clinically, it looks like it's activating and allowing, they claim, that's why I wanted to get your thoughts on plasticity, getting rid of these old pathways and allowing new ones to be formed is the way literature talks. It's disruption, right? It's because it doesn't get rid of anything, it's just separation as I understand it, because when I talked to patients who've had ketamine, they say it, I was high as a kite, and I kind of was disoriented, and then I came back and I feel better. You know, that's there. So, some of this, like you could even imagine, you know, I often do, that the primary effect is actually on metabolic stress and reactive oxygen, that then activates a gudamate signaling pathways, because so, so, you know, I mean, in chemistry, it's always the simplest things that happen first, okay? And then you gradually add on to that in the ripple effects from the stone and the pond. And so, what would happen there is that ketamine would act like a kind of brain defibrillator. So, it basically allows a reset, and then natural processes can come back, and if you reset the support system around that, then those natural processes might have a chance to germinate and grow. Yeah, that's really well put, because then it helps you understand the social support part of this system. Why you can't just take these drugs and go off the loan and expect the same effects that you would get in a so-called social. Yeah, that's a paradigm shift. So, I mean, that's something that, you know, actually, you know, David, and everybody in this group, it really knows is that, you know, we think of the milieu interior as important for metabolism, but the milieu exterior is actually critical for healing after trauma. Yeah, okay. So, yeah, so, yeah, so yeah, let me really push you something, because bomb will ketamine, let's say you have classically conditioned responses in animals, like taste diversion, which is a model. I use that as a model for trauma. So, what happens to animals with taste diversion following ketamine? Will that reset it? No, no. Yeah, I don't know. I can't, yes. Like, I know that, you know, people can get better without these, these, you know, potentially risky drugs, okay? And I find it to be, it gets me off on thin ice, where I don't want to be, you know, I talk about the drugs, but from an experimental point of view, they can be informative, okay? Yeah, well, if there's some literature of some learning pattern being reset following ketamine, you're on the way of explaining, supporting the model you just presented. Yeah, well, I like the, I mean, like, so turns out that Albert's enduring in the 20s, you know, basically discovered that if he made extracts from, you know, from cells, he could eventually purify adenosine, okay? And then we own ATP nucleotides in general, and he had a dog model that was superventricular tachycardia, where he would just give the dogs adenosine and Bob, it would first produce acysteli, then, then, then, then, the, then the sign, you know, the sign of atrial node is the pacemaker would start up again and they go into normal rhythm. And so, in the 20s, this is something, you know, it wasn't until the, you know, the 80s that physicians, you know, medicine discovered that adenosine was, you know, actually a lot more reliable than a cold pack on the, on the forehead for patients who came into the emergency room with pulse rates of 180 because of SPT, superventricular tachycardia. And so, so adenosine is a kind of chemical defibrillator, okay? And, you know, inhibits the endogenous electrical communicator. It actually is dissociative, that's nature. So, this is, this is wild. So, I'm, you know, you can't see it, but I'm pointing at Sue's little face on my, on my Zoom screen, okay? So, yeah, you know, that, that, it's a, the way that you stop the pacemaker from conducting its pulses is you create barrier, you basically dissociate electrically, cells from one another, so that their actions become independent. And as soon as that happens, then, you know, the coordinated action of the heart stops, okay? But then, gradually, the, the, the cells that have the, you know, the biggest drive to, to be able to, you know, restart, take over again and then everybody reconnects. So, I remember in the early days when we were testing, I was involved in some of the early, you know, FDA clinical trials of adenosine. And, you know, sitting by a patient in the intensive carry unit, giving them a dose of adenosine. And like, it was, it was scary for the physicians because they would go asistally for about 20 seconds, okay? Just boom. And then, and then, then it would pick up again. But anyway, this concept, overall concept of initial dissociation or separation of, you know, of the elements, in this case, cells in the system, you know, happens, you know, well, you, it actually needs to happen to come back from injury, okay? But if it's constant, you know, then it's bad, okay? If it's constant and the heart, you die. But that's so that's the rule that I see in all of my reading and writing, that the acute and the chronic have different mechanisms. And of course, for my sanity, I tend to focus, excuse me, on peptides. Sure. Yeah, yeah. So, but that's the, you know, almost stuff by definition, peptides, I mean, you focus on, you know, kind of the evolved peptides that, you know, actually have genes encoding them. But there's a whole, you know, there's scores of peptides that are non, non-specifically, you know, products of proteolysis of things like phygrenogen and albumin after, you know, after an injury that also are part of this subacute, you know, recovery process, okay? You know, so, yeah. Well, anyway, so I, you know, I'm too far off, but it's really important. I mean, it's, that's why, you know, came up with this first book of medicine for acute illness, second book of medicine for chronic illness, because they really are maintained by completely different mechanisms. And if you try to use one to treat the other, you'll do harm. So, so this would be so I need to stop this discussion, because this is an incredible, one of the best type ever. So here's my, here's my proposal. I must sound super grandiose for a second. Okay, this is, I know this is, may sound ridiculous, but when I'm looking at the literature on these obsessive thought patterns and what's going on, they're considered untreatable, but they are treatable and they're treatable by calming down the threat physiology period. And so, you know, if you shake a horn assess and you try to kill the horn instruments, once you're out of the nest, it's a problem. So Steve, from what you said in some, in really simplistic terms is that a lot of our thoughts are manifestation of our unconscious survival brain. And then we take these thoughts that are out there, they're intentionally unpleasant, because this is a survival thought pattern. Then we try to counteract them with good thoughts, bad thoughts, good thoughts, which is impossible. And all these cognitive manipulations just don't work. And so, what's inadvertently happened as I've taught people how to calm down their physiology, these thoughts dropped down dramatically, then the thoughts are also drivers of the physiology. So, then the thoughts dropped down, physiology drops down, physiology drops down. And so, the problem is there's so many of the things that far off the nervous system, other stresses, relationships, etc. They're up the nervous system, calming the nervous system down as a separate skill set. And then there's cognitive, I call it cognitive, you can reroute thoughts, you can't control them. But especially writing, mindfulness, cognitive restructuring helps divert the thoughts. And then once you calm down the nervous system, the thoughts start flying out, the less stimulus to the nervous system, then the real healing occurs. Again, neural plasticity, as you put your brain into creative activities, nurturing joy, sociality, etc. That's a healing actually occurs, but you had to develop this working relationship with these survival realities. But we're doing these survival reactions and stories and ego in self-esteem to counteract the survival physiology in as impossible. And then the final step is you, so we developed these stories about ourselves called ego. Then what starts to happen is you recognize the cognitive distortions of this whole thing. By the way, self-esteem is a cognitive distortion of labeling. We're about to zombies running around with these identities. And so as you calm down your physiology, you don't need to have an identity, your ego starts to dissolve. So then the thoughts really disappear. And I went to psychotherapy for 13 solid years, and then things got way worse. This psychologist I'm working with who read all these books, prior to 200 books on OCD, etc. And things got worse. And I would agree. So the physiology you just talked about. So what I'm proposing, I get a couple things to get covered here. This is my main proposal. And this discussion illustrates exactly what I'm thinking. DRR and I were talking a lot last week. And it's that, okay, I'm writing this book on ROTS, which I should have a pretty good draft done by next week is almost done. And it's all clinical. It's all very simplistic science, etc. And I'm keeping the deeper science out of it because it's already deep enough for the average reader. But I think that this inability to control our thoughts and create these stories about ourselves is what creates a lot of human, evil, unpleasant behavior. Because we know how to physically survive, but we don't know how to emotionally survive. We know not know how to navigate our human consciousness. And so what happens, I think that by actually really re-intention, again, going into all the physiology we've learned here, the comedy, the sociality, by teaching people how to auto-regulate, you actually change the human existence. It's not subtle. And I wonder why this wasn't figured out a long time ago. And my sense is that they put anxiety and anger into a psychological bucket instead of being a driving force. And so, again, you have this driving survival force that we're trying to counteract with cognitive constructs. And I think it's been missed because again, when you have the wrong paradigm to start with, same thing with structural physiological disordered chronic disease, we've missed the physiology of the driving force. And Bob, but you point out maintaining this unpleasant state is an active process, which is really interesting. So I'm going to say there's a, I mean, Senator Wright, we was still sort of committed right in a bigger textbook, but this one might be more important, more of a focused concentration. Everything we just talked about this morning, about the sociality, the amount of cognitive changes, all these different things behind human consciousness and behavior is extremely interesting. And nobody's way put this together. So that's the thing I'm trying to figure out right now. I'm going to get my book done pretty quickly. I can give it to the group just to look at it. But I think creating a mini, pretty deep document about the deep science behind all this is really, really important. Steve. Okay. So David, I listen to you and each time you make a statement, I want to stop you because I want to get into the discussion, I need to the assumptions you're making in that nice synthesis you gave, they're probably 50 assumptions you made. And if we went back to the primary one, which is really, and this is where Bob and I share the same space, it signals of safety. It's really what the nervous system interprets as safety that shifts the physiological state. We don't need neuroplasticity. We merely need to shift the physiological state. I would say again, I second, I find myself seconding Steve's comments a lot, but you know, when you say neuroplasticity, I kind of, I like, I think it's, it's a, it's a term that's vogue that, that, you know, is like on the one hand, you know, gets people thinking about change, but on the other hand gets them off on the wrong track. Right. That's what I'm saying. Get some locked into destiny of totally being required. You can shift state. That shifting in state may lead to neuroplasticity, but it is not neuroplasticity in itself. And the fact that you can get rapid changes almost instantaneously, implies that certain things with you signal, when you signal the nervous system, it knows what to do, and you are giving examples of that. So the question really is, when the nervous system is getting signals that are not signals of safety, what are you, what happens to the nervous system? And the other part that I want to bring up with David, he came up with the conclusion of literally self-regulation as the target point. But when we start looking at the human as a nervous system that develops, we realize the co-regulation proceeds. What David is talking about self-regulation. Our nervous system craves connection with other. This is Sue's work as well, that our nervous system is tuned to signals from others that ensure that we feel safe enough to develop our defenses. Other human beings. So, or, or appropriate mammals. So I talk about the world. Yeah. I like, we're a whole new tree verb. Yeah. Exactly. But our nervous systems and their nervous system, horses, dogs, cats are close enough to ours to get that reciprocity. And that reciprocity is the powerful, I would say, the learning tool of allowing the body to process signals of safety. So what I'm saying, Steve, is, okay, so this is why I'm proposing that we figure how to put this together. So when you look at the book I'm running for the patient or the average person, that means it's a human problem of consciousness. And a lot of it's mental mechanics, this physiology, lots of stuff that's just completely irrational is nothing to do who we are as people. So we take the survival physiology as a bad character commentary and it's not. So I agree with everything everybody says. I was also saying that I still think this group somehow know how we organize it, takes this exact concept and breaking it down like we're all breaking down right now. The physiology, the phenotypes, the different parts of the brain, neuroplasticity versus shifting, etc. So that's my point. I think this is a really big topic. It affects people dramatically. I'm seeing people get healed really quickly. I'm just blown away that people are tortured by these thought patterns and write this group actually has the deep science answers to what's going on. I mean, when I heard this morning just blowing my mind. David, I want to make one more comment. I'm very uncomfortable with the word teach and learn because that gives you a top down sense that this can be managed from the top down. But I think, for example, successful rehab, which males are expert on, is not a top down process. My bet is it's a bottom reinstating the older systems first. The learning, the problem, I don't know how to articulate it, but I hear it when you talk, David, and you're speaking very much a language that lots of people are using, but that language doesn't give credit to the actual directionality. And it's created problems. So as you write your book, be aware of the fact that most people think they've got to learn like go to school and learn to be good or learn to be calm. I have some comments on that too. So we keep getting back to this absolute ground truth that fear and anxiety are the default state of cells. That's the default state. And it's only by connecting to the autonomic nervous system within an organism and in the brain, large other parts of the brain. And then also with life-minded living humans. And also I would say, reconnecting with nature, learning to actually appreciate the smell of a rose or the song of a metal-lark or the running water. So all these things are life-reaffirming that become habit-forming. So from a metabolic and bioenergetic point of view, when you exercise those pathways, you canalyze them. You actually go the enzymes and the cells that are necessary to maintain those are strengthened. Nural exercises. Yeah, well, neural plasticity though. No, no. Well, in the jar neural, okay. But it's this idea of the milieu exterior, playing a very important role in basically shaping, well, allowing fear to go into its rightful place. The term I use Bob is getting permission. So I don't even use the term learning. I give giving your nervous system permission to explore its experiences. Yeah, well, so I think to me, it's all metabolic habit formation. And when you, and that takes energy, okay, it takes energy to do. David asked the question, are we not talking about neural plasticity in a way we are, but the way that people talk about neural plasticity is really on this very high level of cortical development and growth. And I want to in a sense say, this is another level. It's much more like a physical exercise. I have to get off because I have to do a podcast now. So I'm gonna say goodbye. Good to see you. Okay. Good to see you too. So, so you're saying exactly what I'm saying. So no, the intellectual part of it doesn't work. And so what you're doing is that what's being missed in the history of the world is learning how to call it physiology and co-regulation is huge, all the regulations huge. There's a bunch of things to do. I want to make Mel talk because he's tried to get in here. Okay, all right, Belle, you're on. It's hard to do that among the wisdom of the group, obviously, but you know, just to be very simplistic from a recovery standpoint, we tell people to act their way into good thinking, not think their way into good acting. And I think it's okay. Okay. Okay. Right. It's the behavior, the bottom up that really allows enables people to feel safe. And once they feel safe, they can open their pores to the co-regulation effects of people being around them. Because a lot of people do have that social anxiety when they enter treatment. You know, they use substances to deal with the anxiety. The substances are gone. And now this, this incredible aversive response comes up. I mean, we have a young man who's got brain fog and chronic fatigue and CBO and all of, I mean, he's got a list of pots. He's got a list of diabetes, 22 years old. And he responded to a trauma a year ago. But the point that I'm trying to make is he would rather be in his room doing Sudoku than sitting in public areas. And we are saying, you've got to go into the public areas and not only do that, it would be really cool if you could talk. And just the other day, he was doing it and he was smiling and he was laughing and his, you know, the change in effect, I think represents some of that bottom up stuff. So I think that's what you guys are talking about. I mean, as exact what I'm saying is that was been missed in the whole world of mental health is the exact what you're talking about. We, I don't learn or teach you whatever, but understanding the need to actually lift your body, connect with who you are as a person connected people around the connect with the environment says about connecting and safety. And that's what we mean, miss. We keep going after the thoughts, which are dangerous thoughts. And again, we have nobody's addressed the physiology when you read all these books on Intrusive Thought Patterns. Nobody addresses the physiology. Yes, they did. David, you just didn't read those books. They're old. They're okay. You might be old. Jocke, look at Jim Lackman's work. Look at the early OSEID. I mean, I've been following this a long time. They didn't have the answer, but they did articulate and there they said, take SSRIs is actually what they said. That's how Tom and Soul got famous. He gave SSRIs to people with Intrusive Thought Patterns and to a certain extent it worked. Okay, enough that it took off and became probably incorrectly the common, again, you're the medical guys here, became the, it turns out it wasn't the real thing that was going on if we believe this literature. I'm going to, if you want it, I will send you almost 250 abstracts on this topic. Absolutely. I've got the actual papers to what they show and they're claiming now is that we went down the wrong rabbit hole with serotonin. There's lots of physiology in the literature, but it's blaming serotonin. It's not clinical. I mean, nobody in the clinic is working. We're not doing that. So, here's the deal. I went work backwards just for a second because I had a fair minute at the clock. Also, this discussion is intense, which is great. I'll talk to Deon Ketchup at the unless I know the meeting is sort of Steve Overman. So, this is recorded. This is one of the meetings that we can actually put this particularly me up on the internet. I mean, this discussion is incorrect. I wouldn't put it on. I know. I'm going to say this again. I would be abstracted. Please, for my help. I would be happy to do that. David, if Ray is willing to help us, this is the thing. Yes, sir. In the first five, 10 minutes were fantastic. So, yeah, I think just recording, getting the abstract of the meeting today. So, I think that's something I could do. I'd be glad to do. So, my head's spinning right now. I'm just trying to catch breath for a second. So, Bob, your perspective is more than interesting. When I hear this group talk and just go, what is going on here? So, here's my proposal. And I, serious about this one, I talked to Dear about this. He's all over it. I haven't talked to Ray yet. But this group needs to, some of the volume, and actually, takes what we talked about. I mean, these unpleasant thought patterns are just brutal. That's what's killing these teenagers or the kids. And so, there's a way of calming down the nervous system and physiology that we can bring to the public domain. But there's still needs to be a book that takes everything we just talked about and put their very, very deep science in one spot. I mean, I think it's really critical for other people to go for it. Say, okay, because this is, I'm not, as you know, I'm not making this stuff up, but evolving my experience, talking to you guys. And about two weeks ago, I'll send, just click to my head, that, again, so your rights, probably been, I mean, my own experimentation, each religion has been doing this for centuries. But nobody's connected these dots right now with these unpleasant thought patterns being driven by the physiology. David, they did it. But they did it with pharma behind them, trying to come with quick, profitable explanations. And that's what I've been learning from this literature. And they missed the deep physiology. And in fact, it's a, it is a, it's wrong to think that this can be instantaneously maintained. So we know through MRI, functional MRI studies of meditation, and it takes about three months to, to repattern synapses. And it takes three months of consistent behavior to consolidate that behavior, moving forward. So Bob, and I stopped you just for a second. So just that statement, when you look at that, from a, I don't know, all of it, that are behind it. That's a huge statement. Because what happens with my process, I always say it takes three to six months for people to actually truly change. And it's reprogramming repetition, learning it. So your skill says, learning how to reprogram, not solving your pain. Do we try to solve your pain? You're tempted down the problem and you're reinforcing it. So just what you said right there is really critical data and say, look, this is what it's going to take. And if you try to, and I say, look, don't, I actually people really go through my process and look, don't spend anyone in 15 minutes a day learning new material and just keep practicing what you know. And repetition repetition repetition and persistence. And can I just, is that neuroplacicity? I mean, based on the definition, because the, the brain, the cells are, you know, they're budding and then they're contacting others and then they're developing a pattern. Isn't that the basis of neuroplacicity? It is. But it like, so what happens in the history of science is that words take on, you know, a kind of, you know, familiarity that patterns people's thoughts, that then can actually prevent a paradigm shift when you try to use the same word, okay? You know, so, so it's a, you know, because people will, you know, associate the word neuroplacicity with all the things they learned in medical school. And while we're trying to say, you have to go beyond what you learned in medical school. So let me be phrased this a little bit because I agree. So the problem is this process, you can't heal your body. You can open up your body, heal. And when you turn neuroplacicity, I agree. It implies sort of a focus after I'm going to train my brain this way. Where reality is you're body knows how to heal if you just let it. And as you come down to thoughts and feel safe, your body starts to heal or co-regulation or whatever we do, even some medication interventions, allow you to feel, I'm all over medications if they help you feel safe initially, they just aren't a long-term solution. So again, you're my thing this, I mean, these healings are miraculous, but life is a miracle, healing is a miracle. And so it's fascinating why she's people totally transform in front of your eyes physically. David, you just said something interesting, among many things. Let me first congratulate you on your persistence with trying to get us to help you understand this. I know that. I'm a little slow in orthopedic surgeon, now we're we're all pushing back from our own perspectives because we see the parts of it are known. But what I think you're trying to say is could somebody please create something like a holistic model that you as a clinician or any male or Bob could give out. And that's where we're in trouble. We haven't quite got there. Well, I'm actually seeing some a little bit different because the book I'm writing is sort of where the average patient is extremely simplistic and I apologize to this group, but I think there's a book we go all the way in. This deep is can be and let other deep researchers look at this and go, oh, okay, because I think it has a huge potential for all this chronic mental and physical disease. And I think this is a book that's this flat out deep and put but there's all like this morning, it's like at least 10 in-infant number pieces that need to be put together. So it's nice to create a scientific nerve that makes sense. And when Bob emailed me two weeks ago with amount of 100 changes, etc, with his whole thought pattern, he's going, oh my god, so there's a whole level of sub-web and even touched on yet. I think it's really critical for the research world to dig a new. That's what I'm asking if this group is up for doing that. I think there's just I'm not sure how to organize it exactly, but well, you're up for David Arie. The real question is are you up for doing it? Oh absolutely, I'm on fire with this thing. I am so blown away. So, each of us has our own little piece of the story. Dr. Navios is the most expansive I have ever seen and remember I'm married to porges, so I see him. But it's still there's that's a piece of it and then there's the communication piece which Michael Allison's hanging out in the background has a real talent for and the application which Mel is in a position to put into place for what 10 people a month. That's not quite we're greedy here. We're all at the age with Michael being the exception. When we would like to see something happen in our lifetime. Oh absolutely. There's a sense of urgency. There's a kind of a philosophical aesthetic that I am seeing coming from the group that we're basically healing comes from losing your like attachment made is made possible when you lose the ego and you actually reach out to something beyond yourself. So, it is literally you achieve calm by losing yourself and connecting with the outside world. Maxitosan talking again. Maxitosan is still contextual. You need like oxytocin under fear conditions is not going to work. Because it goes to the base of present receptor. But it's still a fact. So, it's still contextual. You have to establish the right context in order for these neurotransmitters and peptides to work. So, can we, is anybody, I have to, I'm going to be gone for a while after this, but can we meet for Siri guys around the 29th of I'm sorry. September 29th is the same as only two weeks. But we just, I think so. Go ahead and schedule it. We, we, we, yeah, I'd be able to make that. Okay. This time open. Okay, I'm going to put down the 29th. I mean, we just, you got a bunch of things that I got to cover, but this is pretty huge conversation. Yeah. I'm going to give you a draft. I was going to draft the group group in my book because you know, it's about two-thirds done, but it really lays out the problem, I think in a clinical terms, it's very simplistic. And I want to talk to DR again today and Ray, I'm going to catch up with you also. But I mean, my proposal is that this group takes a short 100 page book or maybe 150 pages on the deep science, just putting these pieces together. I mean, and then it gets into the download death with, I mean, it comes to massive field self-complications because we're a bunch of people that are having these cognitive constructs that we're running around with that we're about to zombies. So, at the like, bottom point, it takes a lot of mental energy to maintain this facade. Well, we're running around in fear. Yeah. And all you need to do is read the New York Times, which I assume you do. And, you know, you've opted or ramped it up or watched see it. But you point out exactly where we're running around in fear. So we're putting on these zombie suits to actually protect ourselves. And once you don't, once you actually look at how to make a working with sympathy survival reactions, you don't need the zombie suit. He just can be who you are. You know, this sounds a lot of what I hear today sounds like Buddhism, especially what Bob was saying about it. It is. It's not exactly new. But what we have to offer is proof in a sense at different levels of analysis. But I do have to I know we're over time. I haven't found a single good study that didn't find a sex difference in around these parameters. If they study it carefully, it is not the same in males and females. And that's why when I fall back to my metaphor of vasopressin is extremely androgen dependent molecule, which Leckman, this gem Leckman, a Yale who's a really smart guy, but obsessive, focused in on 30 years ago. And I think he went someplace else. He went to saving the world. He is a Buddhist. But he, he had a piece of the puzzle. So what I see this as is a very large puzzle, not a linear flat puzzle, unfortunately a multi-dimensional puzzle. And two things were left out of it. Time, time matters. Everything chronic. This whole idea of an active, which I found the most exciting piece of that I hadn't really so clearly seen. The chronic solutions are active. I mean, I knew where I just hadn't bought, but they're not passive. They're not just sitting there waiting for the body to heal itself. The body has to be in a certain environment, context of safety. And that requires some active elements. It's not just here. All right. I have to run to a phone call. So extremely exciting conversation. I'm gonna land a little bit, but I would encourage us to communicate with each other between these sessions. We have a lot really to consider here. But anyway, thank you. Hey Dave, go ahead and send me the recording. This is a can. Thank you. I will. I will. It will go on to go on to the Polymingle Google Drive shortly. Good to see you. I mean, I'll see you. Bye. Bye.