 started. Here we go. Okay. So welcome everybody. This most of you know, a bottom-navio through this group. I had never heard of bottom-navio till I was in this group, compliments the steepboard distance through Carter. And so Bob has been remarkable as far as putting in science behind clinical concepts. A lot of us have known for a long time. So I think it was finished up right for this group is that we've been secretly known what received it work clinically, but we don't really know why. Then Bob and then different people have been going very, very deep with Bob being one of the core people. We really move this process along. So I'll let Bob introduce himself. David Hanscomb, I'm a sort of retired. I've been not I've been I put my practice in 2019 just because I realized that medicine so just came from the science. In a spine surgery, particularly, we're actually actively hurting people, not understanding physiology, chronic disease. So I was seeing Portus in 2020 and Stucarter and this group is already evolved over that. So it certainly evolved out of nowhere. It was not really a plan process. So tonight I asked Bob and I have a talk to him. So it's talking to him yet again. And I just didn't understand so the basics he covered three or four times. So we're going to start out we do a little bit of rewind and just explain some of the things that Bob is does for us all danger response. We're on a congenital cell and how the trans how chronic disease is so different than acute disease. And I'm going to basically be the moderator and ask Bob a bunch of hopefully not too naive questions, Bob, but bear with me. Okay. That's what today's all about. As many questions as you want and you know, we'll just take it, you know, where it goes. Okay. All right. Bob, we want to introduce yourself. Will we start it here? Sure. Okay. So I'm Bob Navio, professor of medicine, pediatrics and and pathology at the University of California San Diego. I've been here for about 30 years. And you know, we study mitochondria, you know, from conception to old age. And that's the only thing that we study in the lab. So so I guess, you know, so so David asked me to start off with a little summary of mitochondria. And one way to start would be to say I don't really want to, you know, overstate the importance of mitochondria. There only as important as, for example, the the battery and motor of a Tesla car would be and cells without mitochondria would function about as well as, you know, as a Tesla car without those two things. So so it's important to think about, you know, mitochondria though in a broader concept and they're true biological concept, which is if for a long time, you know, was relegated to the powerhouse of the cell. But you know, the last 20 years of science had really showed us that that metaphor description has, you know, really, you know, how should I say, you know, it's not sufficient to describe what mitochondria do for the cell. So so in addition to energy, mitochondria act as the coordinating center for all metabolism in the cell. And you know, and so if you imagine cells as receiving hundreds of streams of information in the form of chemical chemicals and metabolites, those are processed by mitochondria. And you know, work products are produced that allow cells to to do to grow and repair themselves and to communicate and and to communicate with other cells. So anyway, so mitochondria are much more than powerhouses. They they are actually coordinating centers for metabolism in the cell. And they are the first line of defense when when a threat is is well when a threat occurs. So one one thing that's that I wanted to start with is maybe, you know, this description of the two problems of chronic illness that that you know, I see are two perspectives. And one is just, you know, call the bottom up perspective. And the other is the top down perspective. And I think, maybe if I were to share a slide, we could, you know, talk a little bit about this. So in this slide, we have as a goal symptom relief. And there are bottom up therapies that will address, you know, one problem, which is, you know, the persistence of still danger signals and high percentivity to ATP signaling. And also the dampen receptivity to system safety signals. And then there, top, excuse me, where'd that go? Yeah, so, and then there are top down therapies that also address symptom release. And now one of the the the difficulties that many clinicians run into is that they know every master clinician knows that every patient is unique. They're unique biochemically, they're unique genetically. And so on the right, I have personalized therapies where patients are not aggregated because of the individual differences in clinical heterogeneity. And then the way that information of, you know, the results of treatments are reported is in case reports and clinical experience. But they're also generalized therapies that really that address, you know, shared signs and symptoms of patients who are aggregated into groups. And that, you know, classical randomized clinical trials can actually help you despite, you know, individual differences. And one of the things that, that, you know, we noticed early on in doing our metabolomics work and actually has multiomics as expanded. So, you know, to so that proteins and gene expression changes are evaluated as well. There are literally hundreds of unique metabolic molecular changes that occur in each person who has a chronic illness. And in our studies, the metabolism about 75% of the differences in metabolism were unique to the individual. Okay. And actually reflected their unique and perfect, you know, unique path to, you know, their current signs and symptoms. But 25% were shared by all the individuals with that, you know, particular chronic disorder, whether it's autism, PTSD, major impressive disorder, Gulf War illness, you know, all the other disorders that we've looked at, this proportion is about the same. So, the generalized therapies are really directed at those, you know, shared abnormalities. And the personalized therapies are directed at the things that are unique to the individual. Okay. So, I'll leave it at that. And, yeah. And David, if you have a comment, I can, I can talk about it. I mean, here's a, here's a way of looking at the bottom up, perspective of threat physiology where, you know, as a stress, as cells are exposed to, and systems are exposed to greater and greater stress, you move from housekeeping function to an increase, you know, a physiologic stress that occurs with the release of extracellular ATP through gated channels in the cell membrane. And there can be acute danger that adds reactive oxygen to that. Myel exercise will also produce this, this, you know, three things, you know, more than three, but ATP reactive oxygen and xanthine. And intense exercise adds, norup and effron and epinephron and luchotrine. Me for panic, you'll start, you know, observing when mitochondria start fragmenting. And then when DNA synthesis is blocked, there's another metabolite called deoxyadenocene that gets released that, you know, is also, you know, a mediator of innate immunity even in worms. I mean, so some of these, so in C elegans, so, so it's, so, so these things are ancient ways of cells responding to stress. And I would argue, so on the one hand, you know, I know that the terms of danger, anxiety, fear, panic, etc are affective terms that really people have definitions for at the behavioral level. But, you know, I would argue that when those things are experienced at the behavioral level, they are always associated with these cellular changes as well. Now, there, you know, many variations, once you start going beyond this, there, you know, different growth factors and, you know, incitokines that can be, you know, entrained as the ripples of the signaling expand to different tissues. But these are fundamental. And then from top down, looking at top down threat physiology, you can kind of pack up the cellular threat physiology that we just talked about and really look at all the things that have been shown to actually, you know, bring the system back into into harmony, okay? So, and these are the things that a lot of the members of this group will deal with. But you can see they're really complementary ways, okay? So, there's the bottom up and there's the top down way of looking at things. So, what I come attention was, is that, well, first of all, before we go there, so, could you briefly review for the group the cell danger response and why and how extracellular ATP is producing what it does locally? Because what I missed in conversations is that, some of my thought this extracellular ATP is a whole body process. So, everything was really altered. And you'll point out really succinctly that extracellular ATP occurs as a local response to danger, whatever that is. And, and then we take for granted that the body heals skin heals bones, he also shows sort of things heal. This obviously very coordinated effort. So, that's pretty complex effort. And you pointed out how the brain has a signal for them top down signals. I'll actually help the accordingly to that process, give the local signals et cetera. So, they're actually between the top and the bottom is really interesting to me. So, the point I personally to highly believe that for this evening is that we're we're applying acute disease model to chronic disease. And you point out that chronic disease is a state. It's a phenotype, which is completely different than acute disease. Then you pointed out that there's a two parts of healing that you have the local extracellular ATP problem that has to be opened up in unblock before the top's down signal can actually occur. And that was a new concept to me also. So, if you just briefly talk about the cell danger response and how and why extracellular ATP is produced, that would be helpful. Let's take a broken femur, for instance. Yeah. So, the cell danger response is a coordinated highly evolved sequence of events that happens when a cell is in a system. I mean, we can study it in cells, we can study it in tissues, we can study it in the whole organism. But at the level of the cell, it starts with a reduction in the flow of resources through mitochondria that then influence how the mitochondria consume oxygen. So, as the mitochondria decrease the amount of oxygen that they are presented with, the dissolved oxygen in the cell starts rising like water in a bowl. And that increase in dissolved oxygen is utilized by basically concentration, dependent enzymes like NADPH oxidases. So, the NOx, NOx and NOx4 are membrane oxidases that will actually convert some of that excess oxygen into hydrogen peroxide and superoxide. So, that begins this sequence of reactive oxygen production that then can, and actually just the increase in dissolved oxygen, can lead to the oxidation of free thyls in membrane channels. And some of these membrane channels are ones that conduct ATP. So, as a channel opens up, millimolar concentrations of ATP in the cell can begin to efflux out of the cell. And once outside of the cell, there's a seamless transformation that ATP undergoes from acting as a metabolite and energy carrier inside the cell to an informational molecule outside the cell where it binds to cell, other receptors and acts as what's called a damage-associating molecular pattern. But the damage, it doesn't have to be physical damage. It can actually just be stress. So, we've been able to document this in a number of different paradigms, but but when, as the cell is exposed to progressively more stress, there's progressively more extra-cellular ATP produced that then will actually influence the enzyme. So, the mitochondria contain, the mitochondrial proteum contains about 789 different proteins. And over half of those are regulated, or these are catalytic proteins, that over half of those catalytic enzymes are regulated by nucleotides like ATP, ATP, UTP, cyclic AMP, cyclic genome et cetera. So, when there's a change in extra-cellular nucleotide signaling over half of the of the metabolism, even measured distantly through, you know, Venus blood sampling can be changed very quickly. And when we, for example, you can model that by actually injecting ATP systemically in a mouse and what we find in a, you know, in a, in a metabolism of over 400 metabolites, 200 of them are changed within 30 minutes of injecting ATP. And that process of using ATP as a signaling molecule will actually cause this reduction in whole body metabolism to the point where if you measure the amount of oxygen consumed by the mouse after you've injected ATP, it drops by 74%. And the animals begin decreasing their body temperature. So, the body temperature can drop 6 to 8 degrees, depending on the dose of ATP that you give. You know, there, we've, you know, there are many other effects that ultimately, you know, well, so there's also instantaneous fatigue, as you might imagine, for, you know, an instantaneous drop in basal metabolic rate by 74%. The, this ATP actually inhibits oxidative phosphorylation in cells exposed to the increased amount of ATP. So, yeah, so there, there are a lot of factors. And, you know, so there, you know, there's a lot that we've written on this, but, you know, the ultimately, you, I guess you won't understand it unless you understand that perhaps paradoxically, it's not necessarily what most people would think, that when you add ATP to a system, it inhibits further ATP production. Okay, so, so it, it's, it produces instantaneous fatigue. And, and so, and there's also some rigor, there's some chills, and, you know, that you can see, you know, for a little bit in the mice. And so, we think that, you know, the common clinical bedside observation of RIGERS prior to a fever that's associated with a, you know, actually temperature drop, is associated with this early ATP release phenomenon followed then by, you know, IL-1B to TNF alpha, you know, the various, you know, pyrogens that will set up the final fever response that follows. So, I'm trying to understand, so let's say you said stress. Let's say it's just a few stress like a relationship or some financial situation. So, the body's under stress, as opposed to the stress of like a, you know, a broken bone. So, my understanding was the broken bone, of course, is actually, actually, is a cellular ATP locally that does get into the body's systemic production. I understand that. But what about just stress in general, does it create a diffuse risk of ATP throughout the entire body? So, so, it's, um, short answer is no, because cells would start dying if they keep releasing ATP for too long. Okay, so in the talk that I gave a little while ago for this group, you know, I mentioned, you know, one of the, the, the things that I tried to highlight was what I called the, you know, the life or death trade off, you know, um, you know, in adaptation to stress and finding that what I call the Goldilocks zone of ATP signaling sensitivity. So, so over time, you know, maybe, maybe so I hadn't, you know, actually, thought that we'd go over that again, but it, you know, it's, I mean, I'm hoping that the people remember, you know, the word Goldilocks, you know, God, they, they, you know, that I was, you know, trying to, to show that, you know, cells cannot continue to release ATP indefinitely. Okay, so they were in the first acute phase of, of the danger response. They have to release a graded amount that is sufficient to establish that in the innate immunity and inflammation to, to, let's say, handle a, a microbial infection. However, if they, if the cells release too much ATP, then, you know, they are depleted and will be removed, okay, in, in the battle. Likewise, if they release too little ATP, then the whole downstream sequence of cellular defenses for, to microbial infection is underwrought and, and then the, the actual infection kills the cell because the cell has an adequate lead defended itself in this initial stage. So, but after, let's say several weeks, cells need to adjust how they respond to the amount of extracellular ATP. And if there's still, you know, if the, if healing has been incomplete, then ultimately they will actually upregulate the receptors to ATP so that a smaller amount of signaling will produce a similar degree of of, you know, of, of, of of of effect on on cellular metabolism and mitochondria. Okay. So, so ultimately, when, you know, chronic from a clinical point of view, the time scales that we're talking about for chronic illness after an acute insult, really kind of settle out three to six months after the initial insult. And so there's a chronic elevation of extracellular ATP and the, to receptors are sensitized, so it's used both. Yeah, well, then, and then, then the cells don't have to produce, they're released very much anymore. Then, then they become hypersensitive. And so what we've shown in, in actually, both children with autism as well as in, in the mice, if you re-expose the, uh, so the, the, you know, the individuals to that stress and, and for us, you know, the two stresses that we use most are one just extracellular ATP injection and two double strand RNA that what's called polyic, which is a, just mimics a viral infection, um, by binding to, you know, told, that told I perceptor three. Okay, so, so there's a, we, so when we expose the animals at baseline, let's say control animals that have not been stressed, you know, and don't have, you know, this lifelong predisposition that changes their behavior in an autism mouse model, for example. Then, um, those control animals will have, you know, an initial increase in body temperature, they'll have an overshoot, so they become hypothermic about a day, you know, two days after the, after the, the, um, after the trigger. And then within three, three days, um, they come back to their baseline body temperature. Okay, um, in the, in the animals who were exposed in utero to the, this triggering stress, which was double strand RNA, um, you know, this sterile viral, like, you know, trigger, uh, in, you know, during pregnancy for one day, those animals once born have activated brain microglia for life. Okay, and, and then they, you know, there are other things that happen because the developmental sequence is changed. They, they will lose cerebellar percini cells over time, even, what was the question? Um, so is, I think it's only not a mute to say, everybody please go and mute for a second. I think I'm happy to take questions, but I, you know, because I know, I know, I'm just thinking that, that, you know, maybe people had, had remembered what I was, had talked about earlier. And so, but anyway, the, the idea is that, um, when that, they, if we take now animals that are nine months of age, which is the equivalent of a 35-year-old human, the biological age of a 35-year-old, let's say, who's had autism their whole life and never been treated. Um, if we re-expose them to this, the, the, the, the double strand RNA trigger, remember, it's not a, not infection, it's just a, a simulated infection, that's sterile. Um, then what happens is they will have that, that same increase, decrease, um, uh, in, in body temperature, but then they'll overshoot and have an increase in their body temperature that lasts for a month after, um, the trigger. So what, we, so what that is telling us, and through other experiments, we're able to show that they have a delayed type hypersensitivity response in their, their, their metabolic response to that stress, that is only separated from the control, you know, after three to five days after the trigger. So in other words, it's, so in conversations that, that I have with some of my mitochondria, friends, we call this, um, the, uh, the, the, the shared delayed response, okay, or the shared chronic response. Um, it's, it, the acute response to stress remains the same. That's the, that's the bizarre thing about this metabolic, you know, story, is that it's, you know, um, if you expose the animal to the control animals as well as the, the animals that, you know, um, are part of this, the autism mouse model, um, you only, you, uh, separate the responses about three days after the, the trigger. So it, it says that there's a hypersensitivity response that is latent. It's not, you know, overt and it is not playing a role in the acute response to stress. It's only playing a role in the chronic response to stress or the delayed, you know, because it's a long, it lasts for a month after the single stimulus. So, um, let's, our ask a question to what pattern to see an immeasurable, lamex and chronic pain. This is what you're talking about. There's a, there's a, um, do, there's a hypersensitivity that lasts for a while, or is it permanent in humans, or we don't, or we don't, oh, well, I mean, so, so we can keep going back with the mice. And, you know, after about a month, they'll, they'll settle back to their baseline again, okay? But when we re-expose them, they'll have the same chronic, you know, um, response and that, that, that again lasts for a long time. So, so when it comes to just looking at, and there we're just talking about, you know, whole body temperature, which is regulated by many, many factors, but really depends on the heat generating capacity of mitochondria, um, that, you know, that, that delayed response lasts for a long time. Um, and we, yeah, so we're, we're very interested in how the body kind of sets that sensitivity threshold and how you, um, desensitize, because we think that, you know, the treatment of chronic illness is going to require the desensitization of, you know, um, ATP signaling. Um, and, and I actually know that, that a lot of the therapies, they, these top down therapies that include, you know, um, things that, you know, I mean, some, some complicated things, um, and, and some simple things. So, vagal nerve stimulators can help with this process, um, desensitization. Um, you know, we haven't looked at it in some of the other, um, you know, types of inter, talk down interventions that people have used, but I'm, I, I'm really think that, you know, they will, um, also, uh, help to bring about a couple things. They have to desensitize the, the cell to ATP signaling because until that happens, the, the ability of the cell to actually respond to pulsatile safety signals from the autonomic nervous system will be impaired. Okay. It's because of evolutionary, over time, it was realized that microbes are smart and that, you know, um, false flag, uh, and Trojan horse attacks are quite common. And unless you defend yourself against false flag and Trojan horse attacks, um, uh, you know, you'll have individuals die. And so in this situation, the way that they defend is by having long term hypersensitivity where, you know, of this, you know, response to ATP, which tends to make the, the cell less responsive to, um, uh, pulsatile, you know, colonergic anti-inflammatory pathway signals. So to me, it's one of the biggest parts that I didn't understand before is that you, if you don't allow, it changes its everyday, actually ATP, all our top down strategies just don't work very well. They don't work as well. That's why I think that these are going to be potently synergistic. I, you know, like, I'm just, I really think that this, you know, the, the two strategies together will be very, very synergistic and will lead to, you know, recoveries that just have not been possible yet. So, um, there's a couple of questions coming up. Um, I still want to go back to the one slide, which I found fascinating. And you can make the one slide with the up, up graph on it. So it sounded like it looked like to me that your increasing levels are actually ATP, translated in the different types of reactions in the body. And we, we're going to have a little bit of repetitive and pleasant thoughts or obsessive thought-painted rumination. Uh, yeah, yeah. Well, yeah. And so you said, so it looks like if I look at this right that you say your higher E, actually, ATP is actually cause panic, et cetera. Yeah, but okay. So look at the way that this is all done. It's you're gradually adding more and more things to the response as you go, as you go increase up, you know, you go, you know, as you go from stress to danger to anxiety to fear, you know, to panic, you're adding more and more things. It's not that any like it requires all of these things to, you know, to produce the response. Okay. But you see when you get the response, it actually translates clinically into panic, fear, et cetera. Um, yes. Well, so, so yes. So, so when you, when you get like, so, so for example, when there is an acute panic response, you know, um, which I'll have to say, I mean, we don't, I don't have any models for that or way of studying that in the laboratory. So I can only tell you what I think, okay, is that I think that in addition to all the other things that, that, you know, um, involve, for example, you know, amygdala activation and the brain, that these things also have to happen. It's just that we don't pay attention to them because our thinking is not about, you know, um, necessarily, you know, xanthine, which is a, you know, a based, a appearing based derived by metabolism of ATP. But I can tell you that, that in patients who have generalized anxiety disorder, where they have measured this, xanthine is increased. Okay. So, so what, what, what I think is that these things are basically, you know, not routinely measured because we pay more attention to the affective, you know, um, you know, signs of panic. Okay. That, you know, that, that are, well, and then physiologic, you know, like tachycardia to kipnia, um, you know, uh, increased amounts of catacolamine signaling, and decreased amounts of, you know, uh, heart rate variability. So, anyway, so, so this is just under the hood. I think of, you know, these are the, under the hood things that are happening that are just not routinely discussed. Okay. Um, let me ask you, let's go to a couple of questions. I'm not opening this up. Um, my, but he, I just, he'll understand your question myself. So this is a whole hunk story. It's a 30 year journey for me. I've been a fearless banger to being crippled by anxiety, just bleeding out of the water. So I thought anxiety was psychological. I went to second therapy for 13 years. He got way worse, way worse. And we, we eventually, before we met, there's a group, we realized anxiety is a result of stress. It's not the cause. It's just the sensation generated by your stress physiology. And I'm happy, happy to talk about that offline. If you like, there's a huge conversation. But the biggest problem with dealing right now also with obsessive thought patterns, is that your physiology is in, in threat physiology and your consciousness, we flex your threat physiology and you fire off these crazy thought patterns. And so again, anxiety is a result of your stress is it's not the cause. So that's a huge issue. So right now, we have mental health based on cognitive construct, where unless you can, can calm down the physiology, there's nothing you can do with these thoughts outside the hornest nest. They're just, out your battling thoughts where the reality is quit shaking the nest. Is that a first statement, Bob? Yeah, I've lived it myself, David. So, you know, like, after my heart attack, I had, you know, very, very well, paralyzing anxiety that would just sweep over me for no good reason that, you know, anytime wake me up in the middle of the night sometimes, you know. So, I mean, so I, I, you know, in addition to theoretically agreeing with you, I also, you know, personally agree with so if I get to some other questions, so let's talk about what I'm seeing just incredibly clearly, I can I obsessive thought patterns or different variations of them, not good enough, these repetitive thought patterns, they call them rights repetitive and pleasant thoughts, are clearly a major problem and through physiology. And so, you intimated an order of conversation that somehow that through physiology actually translates into these thoughts somehow. And I think players say what you're trying to say, and maybe I misunderstood you. No, I think that what happens when the system becomes paralyzed, it casts about for, you know, for solutions and sometimes during anxiety, you know, basically all, all memories are fair, fair game. And frequently, you know, it's the, you know, it's the time you could have handled that argument with your 14 year old son a little better that comes up or, you know, some other aspect of things that you regret, you know, that, that would become repetitive and are unpleasant, but those, those are not specified by the chemistry, they're just, you know, the chemistry is permissive for those things. And when the chemistry is corrected, then those things just all sink back into the subconscious. They're not a part of your conscious thought anymore. That's an energy metaphor because one of the biggest things I've seen with these crazy thought patterns is just anger. And you get angry when you're trapped by anything, physical or mental, whatever it is. So when you're, when your cell is trapped and in an exuding exocular ATP, from a single cell level, clear up to the human organism, it's sort of the same metaphor, right? Being trapped is not a great sensation for any one cell or multicellal organism. Right. I mean, yeah, so, so, I mean, I don't know, there, there are people in the audience that are much better at, at no much more about the different models, but for me, you know, it's, so, so, loss and, and so, the fear of loss and the threat of attack are kind of two ways you can think of stress, okay? You know, those are two big ways of thinking about stress. And both present with, you know, overlapping, there's an overlapping metabolic response. And, you know, the, yeah, so I'll leave it at that. So anyway, so, let's keep the questions real shortly. We have a lot of questions here. Let's see if I can do to moderate this. So if I'll get to you, please don't take it personally. So, Doug, you have a quick question if I get back to some of the ones on the chat. Yeah, I wanted to underscore this because I had some, some data. So, I got sick at 21, with mono and ended up spending 11 years homebound and bedbound. The semester before I got sick, I was in physiology class and had to take my temperature. My AM temp was 97.6 on average, the semester when I was an able person. I got sick 90 days later. My life fell off a cliff, despite being put on exogenous thyroid hormone by that next winter, my AM temp were 96.8. So they were down 8.10 of agree at average. And so we were able to see both that time frame you described. But also, here I am homebound taking T3 or T4 and finding a resting metabolism that is 8.10 of a degree lower than when I was a functional person at the beginning of the year. And so that was a really interesting way to just, like my circumstance fits the model you just described. And I am the chronic illness patients that people like Dr. Nathan see all the time. So, yeah. So that's just, yeah. So that is, it's a great example, Doug. And I mean, it's exactly perilous what we found in the mice. And I mean, I have data in children with autism. So children with autism at baseline have half degree C or about 0.9 degree, below, a Fahrenheit, lower body temperature than typically developing age and sex match controls. It's a, it's a, it's, it's, your parents will go into their pediatrician and say, oh, my, my, my son always runs a lower body temperature and the pediatrician just dismisses it. Okay. Because it's, it's not like a degree and a half. It's like a half degree and 0.9 degree, you know, so anyway. Okay. But thank you for that example. The other component is when I worked with the guy that ran the autonomic lab at UAB in one of his chapters on mitral valve prolapse syndrome, which is what we are calling dysautonomia before we had better terms. He cited a paper where he showed a right word shift in the production of lactic acid in these patients. And then they were able to infuse that, they were able to infuse that level of lactic acid in controls and bring on panic attacks. And so there's a link between disturbed, you know, blood chemistry and panic attack that was related to autonomic dysfunction in a chapter back in the 80s. So that was, that was something of interest. But it was a way to, to bridge those two things. You said, how would I measure extracellular ATP? At least this is what he was able to do that bridge the top and bottom of that triangle that Dr. Hansken was mentioning possibly. Yeah. So, I mean, yeah. So lactic acid once it, you know, so interestingly, it, it, does one thing, but extracellularly it also actually is an informational molecule that binds specific receptors, G protein couple receptors that influence metabolism on receiving cells. So great. Thank you, Doug. Steve, as Roosio, I'm going to come to you guys. I was just asking about the social determinants of health. And dear, I had a question also about you have social stresses and emotional repression. You know, how does all this start to come together? So my question is basically fairly simple. As I'm becoming a mitochondria, I'm discovering in studies that poorer people have poorer functioning mitochondria. Can you speak to that? Is that because they're under more stress from living in the United States? What's the role of context in what you describe? So, so how should I say this? So we've done a lot of work on social economic inequalities. And we've studied cohorts of, you know, socio-economically disadvantaged children up around in Oregon, for example, and looked at their metabolomes. And it's, what tends to mislead people a little bit if they try to kind of lump all mitochondrial functions into just upper down. Because what we find is there's a very distinct CDR or cell danger response, you know, signal in the children who are, you know, these are four to 10-year-olds that are economically disadvantaged and come from, you know, kind of cycles of abusive, you know, parenting. And the intervention was actually to coach the parents to break the cycle of abuse. And, you know, be able to help rebuild self-esteem in the kids. And their school performance dramatically improved. They're, you know, on disruptive behaviors dramatically decreased. And the kids, you know, metabolome, metabolic signature of the cell danger response normalized. With the psychological intervention, okay? So, it's, you know, so it's true that more struggles, whether it's, you know, geopolitical upheaval in Gaza or Ukraine, you know, affecting the children there. You know, or just kids whose parents have been in and off, on and off the streets, you know, in Portland, Oregon, you know, for their whole lives. The biochemical signature that we see is the same and the way that they recover is, is similar. I'll say, you know, it's, there are some differences, but similar. So, Bob, I was going to clarify one thing again, because there's a group trying to conceptualize weight. Again, we're going to say chronic pain and copain are completely different. Chronic pain is a phenotype, is a state, is a condition, as opposed to acute symptoms that fluctuate based on circumstances. So, you talk about there's the, the X-cell HP blocks the signals from above or diminishes them and vice versa. So, the message I get from you was that you have to actually address both actually successful geolichronic disease. So, the groups are pretty darn good about top-down strategies. And how do we get to the bottom-up strategies? Well, so it's basically requires the development of a new class of medicines. And that's what we've been trying to really push for. You know, so these anti-pure and urgent medications, okay, of which there's only one right now and it's not ready for, you know, general use. It's only, you know, approved for, you know, what it's, the drug is sermetic and only be given IV. It can't be given without FDA approval outside of clinical trials. And it, it's the only drug though that we have so far that is able to have a broad spectrum, non-selective effect to, you know, desensitize pure and urgent signaling, okay? We don't have any drugs that do it other than that. There are about 30 that are in pre-clinical trials that are being developed to, you know, as antagonists for, so P2X7 is one that is, you know, that's been shown to be involved in inflammation. P2X3 and IV are another, other ionotropic receptors that bind to ATP that are involved in chronic pain. And they're, you know, specifically, you know, those receptors when you antagonize them, decrease chronic pain. You didn't even, even, even sermon, you can even look up sermon chronic pain and do a PubMed search and you'll see that there is, you know, a dramatic chronic, you know, analgesic effect of sermon in, you know, in, in mouse and rat models of chronic pain. Okay? So, so it's, it is definitely a player. It is, you know, but it's part of this, you know, that's the bottom-up response and you're working at the top down. And I think both, if we can, you know, ultimately come to the, come to the middle, you know, the it'll medicine is going to, you know, we'll have a lot more success in treating people. And in teaching young physicians and, you know, and clinicians in, you know, in training, you know, how they too can make a difference for these complex disorders that we haven't been so good at, yet. So, but how do you, so a lot of us in this group have seen some pretty miraculous, pretty consistent, I would call them, miraculous successes by historic standards, but we're sort of, well, used to doing this again, people feel safe calm down and they heal. So, one again, my simplicity explanation is that if you spend less time in therapy, geology, and more time in safety, the body knows how to heal. That's essentially all you have to do. I mean, lots of ways of doing it, not so easy said. See, it's actually not hard to do if you know the rules and how to do it, but when the body is in safety, it seems to heal. Does that not have any effect on the extra cellular ATP? I guess my question is, I mean, I've really been trying to say that it does. Okay, like I've really been trying to say this is that it does indirectly, gradually desensitize extra cellular ATP signaling. It's just slow compared to what it could be if you put the two together. But you do agree that if you give somebody a storm and they have a miraculous sort of recovery, but they still have to learn to get themselves ongoing cues of safety. Oh yeah, well, yes. Okay, so yeah, so absolutely. That's a huge, like, at least I had better metaphors, but you know, the long term, you know, okay, so the many of you know that, that, you know, a type two diabetic can exercise and weight loss their weight out of type two diabetes. However, they will always be a recovering type two diabetic for the rest of their life. They will, they will be vulnerable if they fall off the, off the wagon to redeveloping, you know, type two diabetes. Okay, it's not, you know, that, you know, when they lost 30 pounds and, you know, exercised and changed their microbiome, you know, and ate right again, that that gave them a get out of jail free card. Okay, it, well, maybe it does for a while, but if you look, if you go off the wagon, if you no longer do those things that are required to give your body the safety signals and I keep on coming back to the rhythms of health. Okay, so the rhythms of health are so important. I mean, the body, anything constant is interpreted by the body as bad. Okay, it's, this is danger. Okay, you, the, when, when cells are injured or stressed, they will unplug from the matrix. Okay, so they unplug and they are not, you know, they're really less sensitive to the natural rhythms that might be going on in the brain. Okay, when, and then they, they will start, there's some, some chaotic rhythms that start, you know, in those distant plates like a broken ankle. Okay, there's their chaotic rhythms initially. Okay, but as things heal, the, the, the, the, the, the, the local rhythms get entrained by the remote rhythms that are set by oscillators in the brain. Okay, and so, and it's that entrainment that when I, you know, what we keep coming back to is the connection, or in that case, the reconnection, you know, and that's just cellular connections, you know, neuronal and neuroendocrine connections that, you know, help the body return to, to, you know, to health. And when you're disconnected, okay, then, then, you know, you won't ever be able to achieve the, the, the, you know, full health. And that, even, you know, and you can, what's interesting is that cross-social interaction. So this goes beyond the body as well. And, you know, um, yeah, well, we could go into that. But they basically, all these things interact and they, they can help to stabilize a healthy pattern of, you know, of, you know, a vibrant and vigorous health. So, Bob, we have our five minutes left. There's a lot of wonderful questions here. So, I plotted, we're not going to get to most of all, I'll save the chat here, we get a chance to get to later, we will. But, um, I do want to have, uh, Rob, if you, less, if you asked, um, you were, like, first in line here, you had a couple of comments that were good. They wanted DR to make a comment in the last question, was still my question about if you have a diffuse social, in, but DR's question was, um, in social injury with emotional repression, where's the United's of EATP signaling to start the danger response? That was DR's. Then Rob had a comment to make before that. Rob, let's take you had a comment or question, a cortisol. Hey, Bob, how are you? Um, yeah, hi, it's mitochondria day. Um, yeah, we were, you were talking about, um, the, uh, the stress response, the extra cellular ATP, the inability of the cell to keep up. And I wondered if that was cortisol, because cortisol leads to hyper metabolism. If the AT, if the extra cellular ATP is leaving the cell and the cell requires an increased ATP generation, because cortisol causes hyper metabolism is demonstrated by the zillions of investigators now. I'm just talking with Martin Picard about this just like two weeks ago. Um, you know, then you're clearly behind the eight ball is, is it though, is it the extra cellular ATP to leak? Is that what's going on? The signaling is bidirectional. So for example, when we inject, um, ATP into the mouse will have effects both in the adrenal gland for the, you know, for the release of cortisol, but then four hours later, it actually suppresses cortisol by a suppressing ACTH. Okay. So, so, there's a, there's this dynamics that, you know, um, that, that, you know, um, has to be considered, I guess. So, so cortisol is, you know, a definite part of this and it plays rules both, you know, acutely and chronically. Um, and what I can say is is that, um, you know, glucocorticoids are creating, you know, adrenal cells, uh, actually will, in, even in culture, will release cortisol in response to ATP stimulation. Okay. Great. So, um, DR, you, are you there? Just one quick question close down here in a second. Bob, thank you. DR, you there? Sort of. I can't open you. I'm sorry. I guess your device is going here. Um, I'm canceled out. My question was, if somebody suffers a social injury and they're repressed, uh, they're emotionally repressed. Um, where is the, the nitus of, uh, extra cellular ATP that's starting the cell danger response? Yeah, well, so I can, so it, so there, there are global triggers and then local signals triggers. Okay. And then the global triggers, I, you know, see as an, and a cute, um, decrease in, you know, the colonergic safety signaling that happens very rapidly, you know, with, with stress that, you know, so the, so for example, Steve could teach us volumes about, um, the ventral vagal complex and how, um, it is, you know, um, it's, it's, it's control of heart rate variability is, you know, uh, decreased under, under stress. And that stress can happen within seconds of, of, you know, of, of a, of a stress, you know, the heart rate can go up and our, our interval, you know, um, uh, can remain, you know, can, you know, not change with respirations, for example. So, so I think, although this is not something that, you know, this, this requires a different kind of experimentation to actually prove, um, uh, but I think that it is through the rapid response of the vagus, um, and the loss of safety signals that will cause, you know, um, there, you know, their spectrum of cellular responses in the, in the periphery. And so certain cells will respond, you know, more quickly to the loss of, of vagal tone or the, or change in vagal tone associated with stress. And, um, you know, you know, I, I believe that that is involved in triggering this extra cellular ATP release, but I don't have data for that. And would that be a systemic release or, or, uh, no, it's, you know, because remember that all tissues in our whole body is a mosaic and they're, they're actually the, the reason that we even function is because of, um, you know, specialized cell functions. And one of the, you know, and, and one spectrum of specialization is the sensitivity to the loss of, you know, uh, vagal tone. And so some, some tissues are going to be more responsive to the loss of vagal tone than other tissues. I mean, it, it kind of raises the question as to whether, for example, the gut, you know, is dramatic, you know, is very, very responsive to, you know, to this, you know, well, I mean, yeah, so I'm going to go on, but yes. But I just want to, because the, the way you stimulate the cell danger response in the lab, um, is either by injecting the signaler itself or injecting, uh, a damp injecting a recognizable, um, cellular product, so to speak, to stimulate the response. Well, the others that we don't do happen. Yeah. So I'm, stamps, don't release in the social injury. So I wonder if we're really talking about two different systems. But nucleotides are, I mean, 100% nucleotides are. I mean, and so there's a wonderful paper by fan it all came out a few years ago that looked at, um, you know, um, uh, restraint associated stress and electro shock related stress, um, and, uh, and conditioning, you know, this is a good to do a complicated model, but, you know, in, um, in the operand conditioning of the body, you know, so the animals were shown a red light. And then there is a, you know, a, a little electro shock that was given to the, um, the, the wire bottom cage. And, and, you know, after two times the animals would freeze, they'd have a this, you know, normal, the, the freeze response and response to the red light, because they attach that to, you know, this stress, you know, the, the, this threat of stress, okay. But even with the, the red light, they released Xanthine, okay. And Xanthine could be measured in the blood, which has to come from ATP. Well, you know, and, and, and, and then in a scene and, and, you know, interestingly, the way you get Xanthine most commonly is through, you know, the action of two very important, um, uh, severe combined immunodeficiency, uh, you know, um, genes, um, that are involved in, you know, innate immunity and, and, and immunity, um, called adenosine diaminase and purine nucleoside phosphorylase. And, and so you need those two enzymes working on ATP in addition to adenosine. Yeah, well, so in, in order to generate the Xanthine. But you can also inject direct Xanthine and, and, you know, you get a similar response that activates cells in the, in the amygdala. And, and that was something that was shown. So it's, one of the things the Rob Lustig pointed out and, and, and the, the case coming back is these are not linear chains of A going to be going to see these are circles. Okay. Um, you know, and, and the, and you can enter the circle in a number of different ways. But, um, you know, it's like in every anxiety model, it where it's ever been looked at, ATP in a scene in Xanthine are increased. Wow. Okay. Well, I, I promise it closes down. I still like to have Steve Portis for sure thoughts in this full day. This is gonna be a lot of stuff going on in your head. So you, you might not make us a comment, Steve. Oh, I don't, I don't mind making comments. Um, actually, I'm very taken by what Bob was saying about rhythms, because that's my world. So what he said, something extremely profound. It's that when we have a steady signal in, that's when the nervous system basically responds to it as death or threat. So it's these oscillations that are signals that the nervous system reads as signals of safety or I call them, whom is static rhythms. And the part of, so from Bob's perspective, he can see that I've been working on how can you put that back into the nervous system? And this is really what, the next stage of my work is all about, it's about getting these infer sounds into the body because they are slow. And what, one way that we've actually created in doing this is to modulate audible sounds in the rhythms of the body. And what's really lovely about the model is that within our body, there are literally ubiquitous rhythms. And even the uterus has a rhythm that is similar to the gut when the gut is working well and when the uterus is working well, you don't even need to be pregnant. The rhythm is there. And you can see all these rhythms in heart rate. You see multiple rhythms because it's that matrix that Bob is talking about. It's a feedback system that really percolates throughout the whole body. And my interest for the, for Agnes Bob, it's now almost two decades or two, a half in your work is really the basically the acknowledgement that this is throughout the whole body on all levels of the body. And once we start acknowledging that the body and the homeostatic functions of the body have certain universals, then we start learning how to treat ourselves a little bit better. I had one, when follow up on Steve's comment that is a kind of food for thought for a lot of people in the audience. And that is, is it when, you know, when cells disconnect from, you know, the, the, from from their connection, their normal connections to the brain, it leads to a phantom limb pain problem. Okay. So that can be, you know, shoulder injury that where there's more ATP production that causes them to be insensitive to, you know, to, you know, autonomic signals. Then you can have, you know, the brain will perceive that lost communication as if it's a lost limb. And it doesn't, you don't actually have to have the lost limb. You can have trapezius pain that is there because of, you know, this, you know, phantom limb, you know, problem, you can have knee pain, hip pain, any any, in principle, any of this is possible, but it has to do with disconnections and how the brain responds or perceives to, um, disconnected cells and what that means. And it uses pain as a way of saying, you know, there's something wrong there. And I think by reconnect, by reestablishing the rhythms and the connections, um, that's a big part of how some of that pain goes away. Let me kind of step right on this spot because what we are actually both you and I are arguing or basically stating that it's the feedback loop that's critical. Yes. The levels of the system and medicine is so focused on level and titration of levels as if that fixes it when it actually is injuring the feedback loop itself. Yeah, no, absolutely. So only reluctantly draw this to close. I've got 10 other topics to cover right now. So Bob, this is wonderful. Thank you very, very much. Really, I know it's seem a little bit scattered to you, but I mean, for us, ask these questions based on our own questions, been hugely helpful for I think a lot of us here. So thank you. Thank you very much for having me, David. All right. Thanks to everyone. Great to see you again. Bye.