 Here we go. Okay, I have, I found Scott, he published an article on the Room Nations cognitive dissonance depression in our 20 with a lot of functional MRI scan work. And in this group, we have spent some time, you know, with the role of cognitive problem relating to mood disorders, et cetera. So Scott basically used to spend a lifetime on this. He is at Professor Psychiatry in the Department of Psychiatry at Ohio State. He's really been doing this kind of work on the assessment treatment of mood disorders, folks on the transition between, you know, sort of a lifetime pattern between adolescents and adulthood. He's also on suicide prevention advocate. And what I am learning as I've got through my work on Room Nations is a very clear link between Room Nations and suicide, which is really a disgust very much in the mental health literature. So anyway, Scott, welcome and we'll let you get started here. Yeah, thank you for having me here. Can everybody hear me okay? Yes. Okay, good. I switched out the the air pods and hopefully that will, that will help a little bit. So by way, by way of introduction, I would, I would say that this has been a 25 year journey of me doing things wrong and then correcting as I go along. And I'd like to say that was intentional, but of course it's not. So let me give you a broad overview. I started this journey looking at where can I be the most helpful as I was sort of beginning my career as a clinical psychologist and I thought, well, Alzheimer's is a big thing. So let's work on healthy aging. And so that's how I got exposed to neuro imaging, that's how I get exposed to neuropsychology. And then I get a postdoc and neuro imaging postdoc and there weren't many of those around in 2001. The University of Michigan and they said, well, we want you to switch. We want you to switch over to depression. And I sort of said to myself, well, you know, depression happens to lots of people. That's a good reason, good enough reason for me. And so literally I switched from healthy aging to depression. And since I referred to myself as the Benjamin button of depression research, because I started in aging and then I went to middle age and then I went to young adults and now I'm hanging out with teenagers. Who knows? Am I going younger? I don't know. So that's the first thing. The second thing I wanted to say is, and this will hopefully resonate with this group quite a bit. When I say I think I've been doing it wrong again and again, the first phase of doing it wrong was studying fever when I really wanted to understand infection. And what do I mean by that? I was studying people in the active phases of depression and I was studying the expression of the illness rather than the causes of the illness. And I did that for a decade. And then I read some really good work by Goddastman who basically described this whole idea of what an intermediate phenotype is, which is essentially a space between illness and wellness where people are vulnerable. And so I spent 10 years sort of trying to figure that out. And the main shift in that period was going to folks who were younger, going to folks who were asymptomatic or as asymptomatic as they could be in the moment. And then of course moving to folks who were in the wrist state. And I would say I still am getting it wrong because what we've been looking at is something categorical, right? By categorical I mean there's a well state and there's an ill state. And of course I don't have to tell any of the folks who are on this particular discussion that that's a bunch of hooy because we all slide between the well state and the ill state depending upon the day. I refer to it as someday's I'm on struggle bus and someday's I'm not. And I'm not trying to downplay the experience that people have of mental suffering and depression. What I'm trying to illustrate is that the things that we thought were important were in right in front of us all along. And so I'm going to spend a little bit of time today sort of sharing with you my jekyll and hide. And my jekyll and hide are actually problem solving and remination. They involve the same brain circuits. They're often elevated in people who are good in both things. And so for the longest time I was thinking about vulnerability to depression in very, I will say, disabling oriented terms. And what I've come to appreciate is that remination is actually problem solving put very simply for things that actually can't be solved. And usually that falls into a bunch of different categories. But usually it's for things that have already happened. You can't change the past. And so I've come to an appreciation of the past as a place to visit to learn something. But it's not a place that will nourish you or give you shelter. You have to live in the moment in the present. All right. So that's sort of an overview. What I'm going to do then is show you a few slides of the model that I've been working with of depression for a very long time. I think it's wrong. I think it's wrong in a number of ways. Can you see the presentation? Or do you see slide presentation? Can you go to a share screen? Yeah, it should be. Hold on. Come and never wrong. I got to do the share screen. I know when I do this on multiple monitors, sometimes it shows the wrong thing. There you go. It's good. So let's try this. Can you see the actual presentation? Or do you see the present review? No, we're seeing the present review. You are. All right. So apparently, there's a way to do it. People say if I do it this way of changes, but I don't think it does. You still seeing presenter view, right? Yep. Being a slide show and it'll give a better. Yeah. Just go for that far left. Yeah. I think you missed it. Yeah, hold on. Let's try this again. You just need to change the game. No, go to the play for a start. Yeah, that's the one I clicked on. That didn't help us. Yeah, set up slideshow differently. If you do the set up slideshow, so it doesn't have the presenter. All right. So what am I doing here? That's not going to help us. Is it? I think you may have individual window might help. Or go and they upper left to the presenter view. OK. Upper presenter view. OK. And now at the top, you can click swap displays. Aha. That was it. There we go. Now we're in business. I'm looking at the same display as you. I'm not a big fan of this presenter display. All right. So I'm going to jump ahead because I want to leave time for discussion. I don't have disclosures that are going to make anybody worried about what I'm talking about. So we have treatments for depression. And they're pretty decent. But they're not great. And that's, I'm going to see if I can minimize all of us so that you don't have to look at all of that. So those are effect sizes. And this is specific to youth. This is a little bit dated now. It's six and a half years old. But it gives you a sense of the fact that we've got some work to do. All right. So why? Somehow. Oh, here we go. Oh, right. Here we go. So if we think about the TAD study, the treatment of adolescent depression study, the story is actually that most kids got sick again, even though they got really good treatment about half. And actually, more recent numbers suggest that 50% to 70% of kids who get really good treatment are going to get sick again. This is the model that I've been working with for the long time. And I remember, Ferdinand, this is sort of the many roads to Rome view of depression. And as I alluded to before, I was sort of starting out with the wrong idea, right? So I just sort of thought from the beginning, you know, if we just figured out ways to make people's problem solving and control skills stronger and their regulation skills stronger, then everybody would just become, you know, just like Spock. They become super rational human beings. And we would dampen down these negative thoughts. So of course, that was foolish. But the other part of the model, which I've continued to think of as actually pretty important, actually, is this behavior component in the middle part, which is, we are what we do. And if we engage in healthy behaviors, and we engage in behaviors that our DNA is designed to help us be healthy in following those particular behaviors, social connection, physical activity, trying to get to a decent, weak cycle. All of those things fuel some of these natural biorathems. Now, of course, it's not that simple, right? Because we human beings are sometimes or often awful to each other. And we do things that hurt each other. And so we actually learn to be to be wary. We might have trauma experiences. We might learn some avoidance behaviors. And so really that balance of approach and avoidance behaviors can lead to all sorts of problematic things. And so in the approach space, we can think of social connection. We can think of reward. We can think of pursuit of goals. And then the avoidance behaviors, we can think of fear and threat and similar things. And again, this is overly simplified and wrong. Because I think actually, the longer I do this, the more I come to appreciate that in some ways, the people that I work with, the folks who experienced depression, have actually a little bit too close of a grasp of reality. And maybe there's a little bit of, so we say, sunny side appraisal that helps us to make it through the day. So this is an illustration of why I've sort of honed in on the late adolescent early adult period for understanding mood disorders. And that is because I have come to appreciate, and I'm sure you've spent a lot of time talking about, that as a disease progresses, we can use MS as an example. We could use diabetes as an example. We could use fibromyalgia as an example. It doesn't necessarily matter so much to be talking about it from a philosophical perspective. From a philosophical perspective, you have the illness. You have the episodes associated with the illness. You have the changes to the brain that occur with the illness progressing. And then you also have the changes to the brain, to the social networks, to academic functioning, to work functioning, that occur because the disease is actually interfering with people's ability to sort of meet their needs and connect with other humans. And so like I said to you at the beginning, I realized I was doing it all wrong because I was trying to figure out, okay, let's figure out the ways in which people become ill. And from that, then let's try and figure out how to prevent those things. And so it was more a matter of, let's get to the meat of it. And the other way that I was wrong, is I sort of went around for 15 years, telling people that folks with depression had executive functioning problems. And that is true at the level of group, but it is blatantly untrue and unfair to many folks with me to sort of who do not have any executive functioning problems. And once you start working into workments comp and disability claims and fitness evaluations for pilots, you start to get why is it really quick about what you should say and how specific you should be. All right, so let's talk about the brain. So the brain is as we all know, a complex organization. And I came to this whole concept of resting state connectivity again, because I was wrong. 10 years ago, I guess I loved in years ago now, Rachel Jacobs walked into my office. She was a first year faculty member at University of Illinois, Chicago, and she said, I want to do this new rumination focus CBT treatment. I think it's going to be really helpful working with kids. And I think it's going to change the default mode network. I think it's going to, you know, sort of correct some of the hyper-connectivity that's present in the default mode network. And I said, well, first of all, I think resting state connectivity is a bunch of whoey. I don't think there's actually any science behind it. And I was wrong. And second of all, I said, I don't think we can do something that specific. Like we don't really know that rumination emanates from this increased connectivity of the default mode network. And of course, of course, I was wrong. And so this is just a brief schematic of how we calculate resting state connectivity for those of you who already know this stuff, my apologies for those of you who don't. I hope I do a nice job of explaining it to you. So what we measure when we do functional MRI is we measure blood flow changes. And blood flow changes in our brains through processes we don't actually completely understand yet. Come to resupply oxygen glucose, all that good stuff. And to remove waste in ways that are proportional to neuronal firing. And so when the neurons are hustling, they call for more blood flow. And we haven't sorted out how that happens. But we know it happens through some really nice work in electrophysiology in animals. But there are different parts of the brain here in orange showing you that glorious default mode network that actually oscillate together in blood flow. And as the posterior singular cortex that PCC there in yellow goes up and down in its bold signal, the amount of oxygenated blood in the fluid, the same thing happens in the medial prefrontal area in orange there. And interestingly enough, depending on how you calculate the conactivity, there are other readings of the brain that kind of go the opposite direction. That opposite direction phenomenon is a little bit of a math, a little bit of a math error that people have pushed forward in time. But it still goes to illustrate some of the components that we're in the outline that you saw in some of the previous talks you had that if somebody is in a threat state, they're not gonna be very good at doing calculus. If somebody is contemplating the rain that came on their championship baseball game when they were 14, they're not gonna be doing a very good job of listening to their partners they're telling them about their day. So the brain is only able to do so much at one time, which is the take home message here. I'm gonna skip over this because I realized I got a little ambitious in what we're talking about. But I do wanna highlight one thing here. So those of you who may have read some of the Plopscience literature and some of the actual science literature know that one of the things we do now for people who experience chronic depression is we do deep brain stimulation. And we do it in a place called the subgenial anterior singular or the nucleus accumbens or in the ventral basal ganglia. And one of the really amazing observations that comes out of that is that people who have this ominous ominous sense of dread and sadness and fear and arumination when the stimulator is on, it just goes the way. Just like that for the folks where we think the electrodes go in the right place. This work is actually in our adolescence and young adults with a history of depression. And the green on the left shows regions of the brain that sort of flow, blood flow oscillates together with that subgenial anterior singular. So that's right here where my cursor is. And you can see in the fuchsia and in the blue that the network is pretty similar in the folks who have no history of depression and those who do have a history of depression. But when you look at the differences between the groups, that's when things become really intriguing. And I pulled this particular set of slides on purpose because I wanna tie it to something and I'm pretty sure you've already talked about, which is if you have an experience of intent psychic pain, our work and others has shown that it's actually linked to physical pain. And the subgenial anterior singular is actually an important node within that network. And all of these regions here on the right are areas that are more connected to the subgenial anterior singular. Probably in ways that they're not supposed to. And of course, I saw this prefrontal cortex area in the cognitive control network. And it sort of went after that and we basically could use both behavior, activation during a cognitive control task and these conactivity pathways to predict recurrence of depression a year later in these young folks. And so we got excited about that. And then of course, I missed the diamond in all of this. We tried to replicate it. And we couldn't replicate it. That subgenial to prefrontal cortex signal, we were not able to replicate. But we did find this beautiful gem here. If you look at those red regions, it's actually subgen increase connectivity of the subgenial anterior singular to sort of primary motor and sensory cortices in a huge pattern. And then we also were able to replicate this in a prediction of youth, in their recurrence of depression. And so it comes back to this idea that we've gotten so excited about sort of these higher order cognitive functions that we've missed some of these lower sort of more basic isn't a fair term. But more, I guess older systems in the cortex. All right, so I'm gonna jump ahead to the remunation story, because I don't wanna spend too much time talking about this. So this is the work that Rachel Jacobs hooked me into. And at first, I must say, I was way over my head. I refer to this as kind of my second postdoctoral fellowship that I started when I was 51. I learned to become a therapist again. I learned to become a therapist with adolescents for the first time. And I learned to actually listen to the words that people use and the context of the words that they use, because those are the clues to remunation. So what does this mean about me? So a specific thing, extrapolating to a general thing. Why can't I handle things better? Again, moving to a general theme, why did this happen to me? This isn't fair. What will others think of me? These sort of global, why questions? And once you start listening to them, listening for them, you start to hear them in your friends, you start to hear them in your own internal monologue. And you realize that this is actually a fundamental human question. Why am I here? Why is this so hard? Why do we struggle so? Why do I have this incredible imagination? And maybe I can imagine things that aren't great because not great things have happened to me in the past. And as you come to appreciate the humanity, the inherent humanity of these why questions, then you're able to really, I think, empathize with people's experience as they're ruminating. And you stop seeing it, at least I hope. I've stopped seeing it as a problem. And I've just seen it as part of the human experience. And so this is just sort of an illustration of some of the things that we talk about. And so this is the work that we've been doing, I think, for the last seven years now. And we do know that Rumination Focus CBT is actually really helpful at helping people to identify some of their triggers for rumination. It's helpful in teaching them ways to replace the rumination with other things. And it's helpful in, I think this is the most important nugget of it, which is it helps them do appreciate that actually rumination is normal. It happens to everyone. It's not the rumination that's the problem. It's what you do next that can get you in trouble. The really cool thing about this is that when we change the rumination habit, we change a very specific networks in teens' brain pains. And this is the network that we first found in Chicago. It helped us get a really big grant to replicate the finding. This was based on 16 kids who got R of CBT and Rachel's a phenomenal therapist therapy with all of them. That green line on the left is showing the change and connectivity from before treatment to after treatment. The blue line is showing what happened for folks who were in an assessment only. And the kids who were in the assessment only group actually got a family-based intervention called Rainbow, which is very good. And so they got some good stuff, but it didn't change the rumination and it didn't change their brain connectivity. So when we got this big grant to run this replication, I thought, well, we're gonna learn a bunch of things. There's no way we're gonna replicate something because 16 kids is not enough to demonstrate a scientific effect. And it's probably type one error. And so this is one of the probes that we use to measure rumination. We do, like I said, I showed you the resting state before. We also do rumination induction. And this is asking people sort of four key questions, failure or rejection, loss, sadness events that have occurred in their past. And we have them sort of jot down some memories about that before they go into the scanner. And then we have them remember those events. We have them ruminate. We ask them specific questions about, what does that mean about me? What does that make me think about who I am as a person? And if you've never done an experiment like this, it is incredibly powerful. I've been doing this for a long time. And I finally got it in the scanner last two months ago and did this experiment. I was crying in the scanner. It's a powerful, powerful experience. And then of course we have them do a distraction task where they do a mental imagery of sort of, raindrops on a window or a keys in a keyboard. And what we showed, this is, again Rachel's work, is that youth with a history of depression who are currently well, robustly activate a number of areas more so than typically developing teens in the yellow, which you can't read because the white's not showing well. Our parts of the default mode network we talked about that before. Some more engagement of the default mode network. We expected that. That was nice to see. But other stuff as well. Salience, emotion, somat, emotors, somatissensory, visual areas. These folks were experiencing these memories, this rumination about these memories in a much more intense way. All right, I'm gonna jump ahead because I wanna have time to chat. So then this is coming back to the resting state connectivity. Again, jumping back to these young adults. Both of these areas in orange here are regions of the cognitive control network that are lower in internal connectivity. And that lower level of connectivity relates to higher levels of rumination. And we saw that we're like, wow, okay, we're starting to get some hints here, right? Some more sort of cohesiveness of the default mode network, less coherence and cohesiveness of the cognitive control network. And then this is the opposite. Those folks who have more coherence of the cognitive control network are better at inhibiting pre-pote responses. We thought, okay, we're almost there. We're gonna figure this out. And then of course, we were wrong again. And so we did this study. I'm gonna jump ahead to the payoff here. So this is another task where we have people think about and unresolved, the current unresolved problem that they have. And all I want you to focus on in this image are those blue areas in the midline regions. Because when people who are higher in rumination are told to think about a problem that they have. And then asked to do a pretty monotonous cognitive task. When they're making mistakes, they're not engaging the error network, which is what you would see here in red. They are engaging the default mode network. Their brain is completely rerouting to the problem and not to the task itself. All right, so this is the last slide I'm gonna talk about or the last two slides I'm gonna talk about. So this one is showing effect sizes. So these are all shifted so that positive effect sizes are good and negative effect sizes are bad. This was the original study that Ed Watkins did in the delts. So treatment as usual improves depression, a fair amount, relaxation therapy, which is actually a really effective treatment for depression does quite a bit better. And rumination focus CBT does better than treatment as usual. Just like it could be that relaxation does, but they're really not doing much different in the realm of depression. But now let's look at rumination. Treatment as usual, you get a little bit of improvement, relaxation, you get a little bit of improvement. But in rumination focus CBT, you get a lot of improvement, which means reduction in habitual rumination. And then this is the graph from Rachel study in Chicago. You'll notice that the depression does weird things because these are remitted kids who come in the remitted state. So they should start at zero and they should stay at zero. But actually the treatment as usual, kids got worse over the course of treatment. And then a great big whopping difference between rumination focus CBT and treatment as usual in terms of this reduces rumination and this doesn't. This is the data we just published two months ago from our Utah sample, a larger sample, about 30 in each group. And you can see that we're doing the same thing, right? Rumination, we're getting a big change in rumination. And then we're doing the same thing here in Ohio. And then you look at the rain signal. So what we did, this is what I would refer to is the strictest form of replication. We use the same pre-processing. We use the same brain region as a predictor. And we use the same brain regions that we found in the Chicago sample to look for changes. And the pattern is strikingly similar. I would say this is kind of what happens when you get struck by lightning. Not that we replicated a finding, right? Replicating a finding happens in science all the time. What really was being struck by lightning was the fact that the data we got from these first 16 kids in Chicago actually gave us a true signal, right? It wasn't type one error. And we didn't miss it. And so we had the right place to look in the haystack and we found the same effect. All right, I'm gonna stop talking. So we have time to chat. I do have some more slides about the treatment itself, but I thought that'd be easier to go through as question and answer rather than me just jabbering. So thank you very, very much. There's a lot going on here. And I'm just gonna open up. I'm writing a book on rumination to repetitive, pleasant thoughts. So there's an extremely fascinating to me. And I'm not sure my conclusion there worth listening to. But I will observe one thing that, well, I talked to my patients really carefully and people that I work with, rumination, you can get rid of anxiety, you get rid of chronic pain, all sorts of things resolve. And these rumour-y thoughts just really torture people. They're really a big problem. And they're extremely common. Like you said, as part of the human experience, and we can talk about this offline. I think they're completely solvable by regulating physiology, but that's a whole different topic than I love to talk about. So I'm not sure I bring that up today, but also saying that even tonight's meeting, there's a huge problem with ruminations, but nobody wants to admit to them or talk about them. Because they're embarrassing, they're disgusting, they're ridiculous, and having intelligent persons have these things. Well, like you said earlier, it's a function of the human brain. Just the way the brain works. So the first of all, you can't take them personally. They're just there. And then it's fascinating to help people just don't want to talk about it. You come across that energy at all Scott? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I think, you know, I've also done some work in low and middle income countries. I would say not me, but I've been a participant. I've helped people use some of our cognitive tasks to predict treatment response. I would say that it's everywhere. I would say it's worse here. I think our rugged mentality of individualism actually contributes to this unwillingness to talk about weakness. And I think it's toxic. I think it's really unhealthy. So anyway, so the good words, just curious, you're a lot going on in five modules and I'm not my nearest assistant. I'm curious. I mean, I started learning with my kind of DR in my group that when you're under stress, IE, a far-up immune system, nervous system, etc., these rumenations get worse. And the rumenations themselves become a source of stress or a negative input that the brain itself fires off the thoughts. You get this bidirectional process going. In my observation, if you really truly are 100-regulate and calm down, the physiology thoughts really drop down dramatically with my personal experience to be one of those. I've helped many people out of this hole, but really, it's very multi-faceted and the physiology is a big deal. And Dick, what are your thoughts on this? I just went on the first test, the question about the generalized anxiety disorder, which is really at the disorder of rumination, right? And how do you fit that into the pattern you're looking at? Yeah. I have my own, I think I have my own biases on that. I would say that in generalizing anxiety, sort of the hypersensitivity is the core feature. And when you have hypersensitivity, it's uncomfortable. And then you start looking around for pattern signals, attributions, reasons for why that's occurring to you. And of course, it's really easy because life is hard. It's really easy for some folks to sort of, you know, gravitate to the trauma experiences they've had or to the bullying or to the social isolation components. And those thoughts are really hard to get rid of once they come. Because this is one of the things I learned in doing this therapy. My postdoc is a 50 year old. A lot of times people are right. Like the thoughts themselves have some truth in them. And we as therapists have been masquerading this idea that their thoughts are problematic. When in fact, it could be that the thoughts are largely correct. They're just not helpful. They don't take people where they need to go. The other question, I don't know if you're familiar with Mara Mathur's work. We just been working with her, looking at the affect of connectivity, the affect of connection network. And what we found, and she's found is that, there's kind of biofeedback that we do has a massive effect on that network much more than on the default mode network. So I don't know if you know that, but it's interesting kind of complimentary work. Yeah, this is the small world phenomenon. So John Stainey is a K23 mentee of mine. Now he has an R01, he's at USC. He and Mara are working in R01 together. And I'm on that R01 too. So this is a small the world gets. Great. Scott, build you a do you hand up? Did you have a comment? You there? Yeah, I put it down because maybe I think you might have already touched it. But the one thing you said that was really interesting was, there's not much difference between rumination and problem solving. So I just, that just struck me and I was going to ask you to talk more about it. But then as you were talking, you kind of said that these things are not necessarily problematic. Yeah. So I spend a lot of time thinking about how does rumination develop as a habit? And the way that I've come to appreciate it is that there's a problem, right? So I'm going to go through this through the mind of a 10 year old boy, right? I've got this problem. I got this problem at school. I got these kids who are picking on me and they won't leave me alone. And I don't care about those kids one way or another, but every day after school, they're in my business. And I would put to you that a 10 year old boy isn't really prepared or skilled in how to manage that. It's not really the problem solving that you think of when you think of math or physics or anything like that. There are solutions. But what does that boy do? That boy goes home, feels kind of crummy about it. Probably ruminates for a bit, feels sad about it. And if this happens enough, then that becomes a pattern, right? And so that boy, when it first starts, thinks, I'm just trying to figure this out. I'm trying to figure out why are these other boys picking on me? What have I done? I'm trying to sort out what are my options? What am I trying to do? But the thing that happens is you get stuck in the thoughts and you don't actually move on to the execution of a plan or even the formulation of a plan, probably because it's not solvable, right? We don't have, at our disposal now, a way to help bullies to stop bullying, right? We have some things that are helpful, but most of the time, kids who experience bullying continue to experience bullying even if they reported to a teacher. I would also say that there possibly is an evolutionary benefit to rumination in that sometimes being passive and being withdrawn. And in your own thoughts is actually safe, especially if you're in a position where you're being abused as a child. So the habit itself actually forms in adolescents before our problem solving skills are fully developed before our capacity to actually use social resources to help us leverage problem solving. And in the context of not talking about problems because we're embarrassed about them, so it's a perfect formula in my mind. I don't know if I answered your question. Garrett, you had a comment? I was, anyway, I am not as established or background on a simple therapist type here, but, and so this is really interesting, but at a couple of questions, one stemming from you, talk about rumination about that boy you're talking about. What is it when it comes from, or how do you talk about rumination as a way and a strategy to avoid social death? And I'm talking more about the earnest side of things of this ostracation of our pack or tribe of feeling connected and how that affects our justifications for our feelings from which we can internalize that or externalize that. We can attack ourselves in rumination, but we can also lash out. Is that matched together in your viewpoint? Then the second thing is how does fixing rumination solve an issue on a child who then is walking after an hour therapy back into threat? I work a lot with foster kids, and youth kids, and CPS. I can help them think positive facts and work on rumination all I want, but if they're going back into the lion's den. Yeah, so I'm glad you asked those questions because those were probably two of the hardest lessons I learned in becoming a therapist with kids. We as humans spend a lot of time trying to figure things out, right, and that's okay. But then we spend a lot of time trying to figure out what's right and what's fair. And if you put those questions before a 10 year old or before a 12 year old, who is clearly not in a fair situation or finding out who's to blame for a problem as irrelevant, they're trying to survive. And so what the therapy actually does is it helps these kids to understand that actually being right or understanding whether something is fair or not isn't going to keep you safe. Like it's not going to help you get where you need to go. You're going to be a righteous little pissed off teenager, but you're not going to get any better or what you need to do. And then your second point is, what do you help these people with? And I want to get back to what David alluded to at the beginning. There's a cognitive processing element to this therapy where we go through the ruinedative thoughts and we have them slow down their thoughts. And we have them re-experience some of these events. And the goal is for us to learn, right? So we're a guide. We're going with them. We're trying to guide them through the experience to identify the triggers, to identify the ruminations. But that's not the, that's not to me. That's not the actually the most important thing. Because when you as a therapist go through an experience with another person in a safe environment and you go through slow, by going through slow, you get into that physiological control, right? You help them to actually regulate their threat response. They don't know it. I didn't know it at first, but I know it now. And that element of control is both physiological and cognitive, right? You're giving them two possibilities just by slowing down the experience. You're giving them two possible ways to understand rumination in a way where they can actually start to get at control. Because as soon as they can slow down the ruminative thoughts, then you actually have the opportunity to stop, replace, and evaluate rather than react. So Scott, my question. So rumination is normal. If you look at your mind, you might never really stop. It was a content generally sort of positive solution based or is it basically focused on problems? And so have you quantitative the level of disturbance of these thoughts? In other words, there's a direct link between rumination and suicide. So suicide, you know, most people that are going through extreme chronic pain issue. And the two things that were just crushing were that were causing me to commit suicide was these rumination, not a full blown obsessive compulsive disorder. So I call those invasive thoughts. So everybody has some thoughts that unwanted thoughts, then there's unwanted thoughts, then there's disruptive thoughts, and then there's a common invasive thoughts. So there's a real category, and there's nothing helpful for a survival standpoint on invasive thought patterns. So what happened is that, and I've helped many people out of this hole, is by looking at the cognitive part, the physiology part, and reforming new pathways to creativity, people gotten a lot better. Which one of my pains I called disorderly work with said this is unheard of to have OCD actually solvable. Minus gone, his is gone, it is remain gone for 20 years. So from my perspective, you actually learn to write the physiology as you pointed out, it's a solvable problem. And I think medicine put anxiety into a psychological bucket, which really physiological state. That's a huge problem. So why I think a lot has been missed. So before I go to the next two questions, DR, I want you to, can you mention really briefly, the observations you've made in the past on cognitive fatigue. Yeah. Oh, this, go ahead. So, let me just, so let's go. Before we apply them on the mid-term, I'm gonna have DR tripping on the cognitive fatigue part. Because my observation is that the cognitive factors, which I try for 50, it's already years personally, are just, it's just a mismatch between the cognition and the unconscious brain. So, Amy, would you just be calm if I go to the next two questions? Well, you know, somebody who was depressed and kind of run down, giving them sort of additional cognitive tasks to do can make them more weary. So that's always a concern of mine when you, you know, somebody starts with, with CVT. But, you know, as we fatigue during the day under cognitive load, or cytokine, threat cytokines, inflammatory cytokines go up, and that's part of the reason we get headaches and our executive function deteriorates later in the day and our traps get tight and all of that kind of stuff. So, I think that's just, you know, always a curiosity of mine is when we make these interventions into what is probably a physiologic phenomenon that had got a certain level. And our first knee-jerk reaction is to go in and try to change the way people think. That seems like a huge burden to lay on top of them. And I always worry that it'll make them worse. And I noticed you said that you had a really great therapist doing this work and commented on the more important thing, maybe then the cognitive reframing might be the connection with a safe therapist that allows, you know, for them to sort of change their brain chemistry. Anyway, so try to answer your question, but I'm gonna ask your question. What exactly specifically is rumination focused CBT? Why is that different than other CBT? What does it look like when you do it? I'm a physiatrist, so I don't really know what goes on in the room when somebody would be going through rumination focused CBT. What exactly does that mean and what does it look like? And maybe then I can understand why it might work. Yeah, I'm gonna answer your question. I just wanna acknowledge that there's lots of really good questions in the chat and I'm trying to get to them later. I'm having a little bit of cognitive overload right now. This is really enriching from my perspective. So let me answer the question about cognitive fatigue first because I think it's actually probably the hidden benefit of why we get benefit out of things like ketamine and ECT and TMS. It's not that they're actually, I mean, they are changing neural circuits, but I think they're addressing some of the cognitive fatigue in some of the cytokine and bounds in a very rapid way and people are refreshed so that they can actually do some of the work. I'm gonna point out I think three things I think different in shape, rumination focused CBT from CBT maybe four. So the first and actually the most important and I think we as therapists know this and we know this and we address it and then we forget because we're busy trying to help people is that there's a core level of what I refer to as shame. That comes with depression and part of the healing process of working with a therapist is having them accept you as the person that you are invalidating your experience. And so when I say to people rumination is normal, I don't just say it because I think it's helpful, I say it because I believe it. And so then all of a sudden at the very outset, I as a therapist and actually looking at them as my teacher, they're teaching me about their experience. I'm not the expert, I'm a guide, I'm a guide with some experience, but I'm not the expert. And so I think that's a core element that differentiates rumination focused CBT from CBT. I'm not going in to fix the car. I'm going in to actually say this is the car, this is the car that we have. I'm probably not gonna change this car. Let's actually put this car on a road that it can drive on and not put it on the super freeway where it can drive on because that's not what this person's built to do. So that's the first element. And I think it's when we can sometimes jump past. I think the second element is to really help people to understand how rumination changes their experience of the world. And there's only a couple of ways to do that. You can do that with journaling. You can do that with some of the cognitive processing elements. It's really hard for people to access. What I refer to is the domino thoughts that are embedded in rumination because people might say to you, I ask myself, the question, why do I always react this way when this problem happens? But once you start going through and doing a functional analysis, you find at least a dozen, sometimes a lot more thoughts that are linked to that. And that gets to these sort of, I'm gonna use cognitive language, but I don't think it matters. These core schemas about people that people have about themselves. And fundamentally, fundamentally, people with depression think that they don't deserve to be around. They do not believe that they have worth. And so you're going in there, you're looking at the car, you're not trying to fix the car. You're just sort of saying, hey, this is your car. I understand your experience and it's painful. And by the way, people make fun of me because I use car analogies. But so that's the second part. Is you're trying to help people understand their experience and to see how the loops happen, right? The loops happen, the loops are actually keeping them sick. And then the third element is really a partnership, which is like, let's bring in everything we can. We're gonna try bigger tires. We're gonna try better windshield wipers. We're gonna try another rearview mirror. Anything we can do to change the experience that people have driving their car. I'm not changing the car. I'm changing where they focus their attention, what they do. And so it's really RF, really little C, big B, T. What are the behaviors people can engage in to help them to feel better? It's interesting what you said there, because I think we do the same with our patients who come in with earthalb and asthma, neck pain and back pain and bladder pain and all of that. And when we tell them, your body, your in chronic threat, you may not know it. Your stress levels are high. And your body is doing exactly what it's supposed to be doing given your threat load. And we just need to slide you back and you're not broken, you'll get better in the enormous relief. I mean, it's just palpable in the room when they go, oh my God, you know what's going on with me and I can slide the other way. That is something that I've experienced as well, if you can tell them, your body, or in this case your brain is doing exactly maybe what it should be doing, it's normal. We've got to get you out of a threat stress state and you will be fine. And they get better quickly when they recognize that. I think there's a lot of gloom and doom around the symptoms they come in with, they think they're permanently broken. As you two hands, I'm, I'm gonna get you the two questions. Jan, you had a comment and then Doug. In terms of how our society is hyper sensitized to stimuli and on the one hand, it grooms bullying behavior and on the other hand, an infictum behavior, not that the victim is responsible for at all. So how much do you think that plays into it? For instance, in the educational system, previously students had to memorize things and do things that required a large amount of focus and concentration. That doesn't exist nearly as much anymore. So I was wondering how much you thought that played into it. And then the second piece of it is when people are teaching this current rendition of mindfulness meditation, essentially what it does is despress and put some space between thoughts. And how does that fit into your paradigm? Can you say that last bit again? So with the current rendition of mindfulness meditation, most of the practices, at least it begins with meditation focusing on the breath. So that would be a concentrated focus. And then secondly, allowing space between thoughts and the breathing slows down changing physiology. How would that prove into your paradigm? Yeah, so I'm going to answer your second question first. So in the UK, which has really sort of been, I would say the monitoring generative space for most of our third wave therapies, not all of them. They have the NHS, right? And most people actually get access to CBT pretty quickly in the experience of a defensive episode. And if you don't respond to that, those folks were kind of stark for a long, long as time. And then mindfulness, you know, base CBT was developed for those folks who didn't respond to CBT. And it was really kind of being connected to experience and a lot of how we experience. And then getting into, like you said, some of the physiology of the experience and how to moderate that. And there were people who didn't respond to that either. And that is where rumination focused CBT came out of is that the fiends the car. And then we went to mindfulness. We tried to accept the car and to experience the car as it was. And then rumination focused CBT came along and it was like, well, we're not changing the cognition. That's not helping this sort of mindfulness engagement isn't helping. So now we've got to get into this behavioral, what I'd say, behavioral replacement. We're finding behaviors. And by behaviors, I mean thoughts and actions that can actually substitute for the habit of rumination. And it still doesn't help everybody. So that's the answer to the second question. And I would come back to this comment about bullying in victim experiences. The experience of the victim, and I have this experience as a neuropsychologist in people who have been injured in car accidents or through chemical exposures, whatever might be. There's such an intense focus on being right and finding out who's to blame and who should write the check. And what happens is people become bitter and miserable humans trying to prove that they're right. And they get stuck in that thought pattern. And so I don't want to do the victim blaming. I just want to make an observation that if I'm spending all my energy focusing on an event that happened seven years ago, I can't fully embrace today. Like it's impossible. I can't be in the moment. I can't do any of the mindfulness stuff that you're talking about. Because I'm still stuck in that spot. Now in terms of the bullying, I don't have any answers for that. We'll do more question here and we'll close down. We don't get all the ones on the sidebar here. But God, this is really good stuff. I'm W.A.W. and Final Comment here. Yeah. So there was a Swedish psychologist named Guy Winick who gave a lovely TEDx talk about rumination and sort of its paralyzing difficulties. He talked about if you can interrupt the thoughts for two minutes, then they'll go away. And my girlfriend had a breast biopsy in Brazil with the holidays and everything. She had 90 days of uncertainty coming. I developed something for her and then gave it as a speech. I talked about him using this to interrupt. You know, I actually had my aunt sing herself a song every time she noticed herself ruminating. It was two minutes. But you can't just ignore thoughts because they're real. And so that's when I used your expressive writing, Dr. Hanskum, and had her say, look, say, I'll think about it but not now. And then give yourself a block once a day to say, let me get this out. Let me throw it away. Let me do it again the next day. And maybe that'll help me for 90 days while I'm waiting to find out if I'm a cancer patient or not. And it was sort of, I took those two pieces. It was sort of a behavioral thing and then I added the song because my aunt cannot not, if you tell her not to think about something, it didn't work. So. Yeah. Thanks for sharing that. I think one of the things I have struggled with a lot as a person who came to this as what I would refer to as a problem slower first and a therapist second. I've learned that the problem slower is actually pretty ineffective. The therapist is actually much more effective. The healer is much more effective. And what you're describing is working with someone to give them an avenue for their problems, right? To give them an avenue for their thoughts. So a lot of patients I work with right now. I have them scheduled their worry time. You use the term writing time. And we schedule it at a time when they're alert and when they're not going to be distracted. Because what happens if you don't honor those thoughts, they come at unopportuned moments when you're not mentally alert and you're not emotionally ready to handle them. And so it's best to take them after a stiff cup and a coffee. So that's often say. So Scott, thank you very much. This is an excellent talk. And we really probably have you back in the fall and actually finish up on this. There's a lot going on here. Dr. Navio, probably in April, has gonna connect the mitochondrial inability to complete the healing cycle with repetitive thought patterns, which I had no idea until that, until that was possible until two weeks ago. And Bob Navio has been a lot of time, right? The mitochondrial level with safety versus threat and all the clinical manifestations of the inability to complete the mitochondrial healing cycle. And he's got correlations with thought patterns, which you know, safety physiology versus threat physiology is fascinating stuff. So we'll be hearing him sometime in April. But this is fantastic. Thank you. And I encourage all of you to look at the articles that I'll have loaded up in the drive tonight. So anyway, Scott, thank you very much. Thank you. All right, thanks everybody. David, is there a way to export the chat so I could respond onto some of the comments? What I wanna do, the chat goes into the, kind of if the emails are short there or not. But I do, the chat goes into the Google drive where your talk will be, people access it. And then people, let's see, I'll put, do you buy a picture email in the chat, into the drive so they can get ahold of you with questions? Yeah, and I hope it's clear from my presentation style. I really don't know what I'm doing. And I say that with the full embrace of humor and humility that comes with it, we have a lot to learn. And so you might have observations and you might have comments. I will welcome them because I'm not doing better than the average bear in helping people. And I wanna get better. And there's only one way to get better and that's to learn. So I'm dig, very far you take off. I still think there's a big gap to be bridge here between the physiology and these thought patterns. And again, in mental health world, OCD for instance is considered untreatable and I've seen it treated a lot, including myself. I had an extreme form of it. I've dealt with people with extreme forms of it. And when you come to the physiology, it gets better. I mean, so when they have recurrences of these thought patterns, my focus is on the physiology, not the thought patterns. And the metaphor uses that of a hornet's nest, that the hornets are your thoughts and the nest is your brain. And the hornets are doing their business to live in life and somebody shakes the nest. Well, the hornets are the nest and they're angry. So we tend to fight, you know, bad thoughts with good thoughts. And to retrump the hornets back into the nest, where the real answer is quit shaking the nest. So we found out there's a con into like a thought separation part of it. And then common with physiology. And you know, in pleasant thoughts, for the physiology and the physiology fires up the thoughts, it's very bidirectional. And so you can't just calm down the thoughts because the physiology can be fired up from so many other reasons. So as much as it comes with physiology down, then the third step, remember, plus at least standpoints moving into creativity, creating circuits to the brain away from the pain circuits, not just, you know, distraction type positive experience, but really moving away from these circuits, then the final part is, because we were very philosophical, as you learn to feel comfortable with physiology, which is very uncomfortable, then you don't need an ego to actually defend which really obvates the need for thoughts. It's a dramatic change. So I've raised the thoughts with the field of solutions and creativity. I don't have OCD anymore. I don't have a whiff of it. It's gone. Now, my parents and colleges have worked with about six months ago, can't even be for other reasons. Turn out he has severe OCD. And in three months, again, by addressing physiology, his OCD just let out disappeared. So I wish shock. He wish shock. I talked to him about a week ago, which is now about maybe seven months since we started, he's just continuing to move forward. We's now creating a surface more and more away from the pain circuits. And so to me, the healing actually occurs with creativity where humans, like every living creature, where we reactive species, then it's DR pointed out and you pointed out that when you're reacting anxious and frustrated, your neocortex gets down, regulated. So that's why I think Dick and your bio, be back where I wish he was still on tonight. But I think there's a pretty big bridge to be jumped here or crossed, putting the physiology in with what you're doing. I don't know, Dick, what do you think? Yeah, well, that's what we think. That's what I spend my life trying to. But we don't cure anyone either. So I'm always really interested in running it out too. And we've been really interested in rumination as a matter of fact. So I think that I think you're on to something really important. So do you, as your lab done work with ruminations? Yeah, we mostly looked at GAD because there's such a strong autonomic signature with GAD, with a very poor heart rate variability. So, but I think it's worth really exploring more with what you were talking about, the difference in the kinds of thoughts between it too. No, it's jumping to cognitive to come on by. I think by looking at the cognitive and the physiology, I think it's become a much more solvable problem. But the question, because I was going to ask you that Dick and answer during this session was, do you, how, I mean, just where the brain works, the brain's never really stopped. Whereas looking out for danger, looking out for trouble, looking out for whatever. But have you quantitated the severity of the ruminations? I mean, worries went thing, which is normal, especially if there's something to be worried about. And then I have to steep as Ruchka's still on, but he's brought up to sing called social determinants of health. And about 80% of persons' health depending on their circumstances. So for instance, the incidence of anxiety disorders, if your income is less than $30,000 a year, it's 100%. So then you're right to be worried, you're not safe in a capitalistic world. So there's a lot of layers to this, but my question is, have you used tools to quantitate the severity of what I call Ruch, repetitive and pleasant thoughts? Yeah. We're doing some, what I would refer to as model building, which is, so we're taking the induced ruminations, and we're taking these incidental ruminations, and we're trying to identify the neural signature of nodes. And then of course, the holy grail, right? The holy grail is to use those pattern classifiers, and when people are just sitting in the scanner and minding their own business, to identify the pattern, to stop the scanner and say, what are you thinking about right now? And to validate that experience, because then if you can do that, I think there was an earlier comment, if you can identify it, then you can do biofeedback, right? You can do biofeedback to change that, and you can have people actually essentially use physiology, like you were saying before, used physiology to control some of these loops. And I don't know if we're gonna get there. Or not, but I think that is an interesting avenue of learning. I also think, I don't know if there was a comment about this before, I think somebody said something about, this is a lot like act. For people, for what I would refer to is your common run of self-help books is not gonna do the trick for them. Everything you do has to have a core of acceptance in it. Like that's a core element of helping people who have not been helped by sort of your frontline treatments. And we do that, I know there's chronic pain people here. That's a core element of it, right? Which is the acceptance, and then as soon as you accept it, you can move to some sort of adaptation. So Dave, yeah. I just kind of ran him question, cause you brought a Bob Navio, but I wonder is anybody correlating the, sort of the connective types in the brain to, cause they're phenotypes, right? To like the phenotype of mitochondria, the phenotype of immune cells, to kind of see this, you know, the physiology from the ground up to the brain and getting those correlates. Have you ever seen anybody do that? Well, hey, that should Bob's gonna present. Yeah, I was just wondering if Bob, does Bob have a study going all the way up to a functional MRI? Like, do we, does anybody, is anybody looking at mitochondrial phenotypes in, but for example, obsessive compulsive disorder, what phenotype they're in, what phenotype immune cells are in, and what the brain tends to look like. I'm just, it seems like there's a, there's something to tether together there, and maybe it's been done and I don't know. Have you heard of that, Scott? I've not heard of it, but I'm interested in learning more because I think there's definitely, there's definitely some connections that are relevant, but it's sort of, it's out of my skill set. Yeah, that's, yeah, we should let you know when Bob Navios gonna speak, he's like, he's amazing, it's a very cool stuff. No, anyway, all right, again, Scott, thank you, wonderful talk, really nice and we appreciate it, thank you. Thank you, bye.